a host ofsignaling molecules are released by activated immune cellsincluding inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandinsand cytokines. stocking density. group cow relocations to only take place once a week. thus, our knowledge base is a combination of controlled research, observational studies, and field experience. regardless of the effect on rumen epithelium, feedingdiets containing higher proportions of nfc should pro-mote ruminal microbial adaptation to nfc levels typicalof lactation diets. the objectives here were to: 1. identify critical thresholds above which nefa and bhb concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2. investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall, tmr-fed herds; 3. evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above nefa and bhb critical thresholds; 4. evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5. intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6. identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7. evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with propylene glycol. conversely, if each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event, the true incidence of mastitis would be grossly overestimated. an improved understanding of the inflammatorypathways at the molecular level which play an importantrole in normal immune function, metabolism and repro-duction may improve our ability to predict and preventtransition cow disorders. since higher concentrations of ketone bodies and lower calcium concentrations are expected at calving and postpartum, arbitrarily assigning a threshold based on a best guess or data distribution runs the risk of just being on the higher or lower end of normal. the dmi for wk 1 postpartum was correlated (p < 0.01) with percent changes in dmi during the last 3 wk (r = 0.34), last 2 wk (r = 0.49), or last week (r = 0.39) prepartum. roche (2003) demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from subclinical hypocalcaemia. recheck the prevalence in 2 weeks to determine the next course of action, e.g. in well managed tmr fed free-stall herds in the northeast and upper midwest, the incidence and thus prevalence of sck is high. the energetic demands of gestating cows reach 1.3 to 1.5 times the maintenance requirements by the end of gestation (quigley and drewry, 1998). when implemented correctly, these diets have been successful in decreasing incidences of peripartal health disorders. finally, this review will conclude with a summary of transition cow management goals. in contrast to propylene glycol, ionophores are relatively inexpensive and much easier to administer. eight hundred and forty-nine cows from 16 farms were sampled weekly for the first 3 weeks post-partum. it is not the focus of this paper to review various nutritional management strategies for periparturient cows. control of feed intake and meal patterns may differ by parity and should be considered when grouping cattle. if grass silage quality is poor, cows may lose bcs in the dry period. (newby et al., 2017) management of transition cows is one of the most important aspects of farm management that will set up dairy cows for success during the lactation period. with the background given above it might be curious to ask why the liver would accumulate fat if it can process the nefa. health outcomes across studies also provide little evidence for marked improvement. it is interesting that a large on-farm study recently completed in northern ireland did not find any benefit on milk production, fertility or culling as a result of supplementing concentrates for the final three weeks pre-calving for cows with bcs in the desired range. consequently, vfa absorption is reduced (allen and beede, 1996). intravenous and even subcutaneous ca can result in a rebound hypocalcaemia 24 hours after administration (box 1), and thus repeated administration of intravenous or subcutaneous ca are counterproductive (blanc and others 2014, domino and others 2017). future opportunities immune regulation and inflammatory response as we continue to increase our understanding of immune regulation in the transition dairy cow, it becomes an emerging area for future improvements in dairy management. transition cow management is central to the productivity, fertility, health and welfare of the dairy cow and is an area where meaningful engagement with farmers can have major positive welfare consequences for the cows and adds momentous value to the veterinary services provided for the farmer. however, ketosis as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several recent papers. approximately 60 to 30 days prior to calving) has received little attention. commingling primiparous and multiparous cows. recent studies support both the subclinical ketosis, clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on milk production. although not common, the ucd herd health group have encountered problems where occasionally some farms may feed the same mineral to milking and dry cows inadvertently or push the milking cow total mixed ration (tmr) in to dry cows, this is important to look at, as the level of calcium for example will be entirely different and can be very dangerous with regard to milk fever control. over the long term, dairy cows appear to strive to maintain some normal degree of body fatness (friggens, 2003). not surprisingly, considerable research is being conducted to better understand transition cow physiology and to develop improved techniques for transition cow management. maximizing dry matter intake (dmi) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition cow program. the growth of fetal tissues follows an exponential curve beginning in the third trimester of pregnancy (bell et al., 1995; house and bell, 1994). treatment of cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (fisher et al, 1973). there are two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed delivery frequency.  impact on reproductive performance there has been conflicting research findings on the impact of subclinical ketosis on reproductive performance. milk yield was lower 2 to 4 weeks in one study (rajala-schultz et al, 1999) and 8 to 9 days in another study (edwards and tozer, 2004) prior to the diagnosis of clinical ketosis. calcium is necessary for all muscle and nerve function, and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition.1 these processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum, and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of milk production. it is commonly accepted that subclinical hypocalcemia is an important disease, but very little is published on the impact of this problem on subsequent risk of disease or production loss. monensin included at 30 grams per ton of total ration (high group), decreased the incidence of subclinical ketosis and significantly reduced blood bhba levels in the first three weeks postpartum (sauer et al, 1989). one study (massey et al, 1993) reported a nearly 5 fold increase in the risk of abomasal displacement (1997). niacin fed prior to calving at the rate of 3 to 6 grams per day may be helpful in reducing blood levels of bhba (fronk and schultz, 1979; dufva et al, 1983). the proportion of ndf and nfc in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to maximizing dmi. this paper reviews testing of neb-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (sck), individual animal and herd consequences, treatment, and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to neb in dairy cows. economic impact of transition cow diseases for cows that develop any transition cow disease, the total cost of that disease can be divided between component costs and attributable costs, where the component costs are the sum of the direct and indirect costs of that particular disease and the attributable costs include the increased risk of developing another related disease. these factors are: high bcs at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma nefa (cameron et al., 1998); reduced dmi in the transition period (constable et al., 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio (shaver, 1997). this results in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue, manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues, and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland.2-11 the formation of ketone bodies (bhb, acetoacetate, and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues.11 however, when there is excessive ketone body formation, hyperketonemia can result.16’26 higher dmi post-partum generally results in lower circulating nefa and bhb and has been associated with improved health, performance, and less severe post-partum neb.18 optimizing dmi during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health and production. immune cells are particu-larly sensitive to oxidative stress because their membranescontain high concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acidsthat are very susceptible to peroxidation, and they pro-duce large amounts of reactive oxygen species when stimulated (spears and weiss, 2008). clinical hypocalcemia (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle.1 this disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum, ketosis, metritis, retained placenta, mastitis, culling, and decreased milk production.2-4 traditionally, subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration traditionally, subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration. obviously, if ketones reach a high concentration in the blood the cow becomes ketotic. in farms feeding totalmixed rations the number of variants of the lactationaldiets is limited, making phased changes of dietary com-position impossible. systematic recording of clinical diseases with consistent case definitions is 1 of the best groups of metrics to monitor. herd variation for this disease is wide and herd level risk factors are poorly described. the diets of close-up cows should be formulated to provide 110 to 130% me, but not more, and over 1200 g/d mp. the treatment for milk fever remains, for the most part, unchanged since its implementation in 1928. a portion of this increase in nefa is obligatory and is under hormonal control while another portion is the result of an energy deficit (negative energy balance or neb) (bertics et al., 1992; grummer, 1995; dyk and emery, 1996). thus, it appears that changes in dmi prepartum, and not the absolute dmi per se, are more highly related to poor intakes and fatty livers after calving. force-fed cows had greater plasma glucose concentrations 2 d before calving, less liver tg accumulation at 1 d after calving, and tended (p < 0.11) to produce more 3.5% fat-corrected milk (46.1 vs. 41.7 kg/d) during the first 28 d of lactation. at this time, there is increasing milk production, but a lag in feed intake. culling may be more likely because of impaired health, reduced production and potentially impaired reproductive performance. although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data, the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5). we could have the best formulated diet with the best ingredients, but if cows do not have access to it, the diet composition would be irrelevant. high-fiber by-product feeds such as soybean hulls, beet pulp, corn gluten feed, and wheat middlings that are highly digestible also can improve total energy intake. let us discuss each of these and then try to synthesize a strategy. every pound of milk lost from peak production represents a loss of 200 lb of milk for the lactation. there is not a lot of research evaluating the requirement for these strategies in grass silage-fed dry cows going to grass post-calving. it is a common recommendation to divide the dry period into two feeding groups: far-off and close-up (radostits et al, 1994). turbulent transitions increase health care expenses, decrease milk production, impair reproductive performance, and result in premature culling or death. similarly, multiparous cows, regardless of calving difficulty, that were treated with this anti-inflammatory drug had lower systemic inflammation and produced almost 4 pounds per day more milk during the first 60 days in milk compared to cows that were not treated (barragan et al., 2020c). this concentrate (starch) feeding at this time may be of increased importance for thin cows. managementpractices which aim to optimize dry matter intake (dmi),increase the energy density of the diets without sacrificingrumen function, and maintain body condition score at 3.5on the 1–5 scale at calving are recommended (macdonaldand roche, 2004).3.2. limit protein and energy intake provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and withdraw concentrates. it is important that silage is analysed to determine the need for supplementary protein. as i have mentioned in many of my previous articles (barragan, 2020b), personnel training is the very first, and perhaps the most important, step to achieve this. the discrepancy, as discussed above, likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively, but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period (drackley, 1999). in new research conducted by our group23 involving 72 commercial dairy farms in new york and vermont, only 25% of the pre fresh tmr had particle size within recommended ranges (10 to 20% on the top screen; 50 to 60% in the middle; < 40% in the pan] using the penn state particle separator (psps]. with regard to feed delivery frequency, research has shown that when performed often, up to four times a day, this practice will stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat. this article will focus primarily on the importance and prevention aspects of subclinical ketosis. production and increased disease risk, while the later culling association might be related to reduced reproductive performance. interest in and support for the close-up diet of higher nutrient density (i.e., more cereal grains and less forage) stems from an elegant experiment by bertics et al. physiological changes during the transition period. theneb and high plasma nefa contribute to the developmentof fatty liver syndrome which in turn is a contributing factorto other health concerns and periparturient immunosup-pression in the postpartum period (lacetera et al., 2005;kehrli et al., 2006). recent advances in understanding of production diseases include the emergence of propylene glycol and rumen protected choline as the supplements of choice for preventing fatty liver and the absence of any preventative effect of increased energy density in the close-up dry period diet on this condition; the linear negative influence of dietary cation anion difference (dcad) on the incidence of milk fever regardless of urinary ph or the target level of dietary dcad achieved; the inflammatory response associated with subacute rumen acidosis and its effect on feed intake; an increased awareness of the potential for antioxidant status to improve immunity and health in the transition period; the development of more standardised diagnostic criteria and treatment protocols for uterine infection. furthermore, there may be opportunities for additional mp and aa during the immediate post-partum period.22 grouping and facility factors in transition cow management even the best formulated nutritional approach to dry cows can become derailed by issues with grouping and facility management of transition cows. while prepartum dmi tended (p < 0.11) to be increased by about 1.5 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density, there was no difference in postpartum dmi, milk production, energy balance, or loss in body condition. given that all cows experience a reduced feed intake and body con-dition, infection and inflammation of the uterus after calving, there is a need for furtherresearch on the immunology of transition dairy cows. green (1997) reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (crc), which delivers 335 mg per day, significantly reduced the concentrations of bhba and increased those of glucose. dr. robert van saun clearly explained in our previous articles some of the key aspects for formulating transition cow diets (van saun, 2020). these hormonal changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi, but also coordinate the metabolic changes that favor, if not force, the mobilization of body fat reserves from adipocytes (grummer, 1995). routine inspection of the dietary cation anion difference (dcad] should be performed to ensure herd goals are being met. however, most transition cow diseases have a range of severity, and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd.1213-35 the consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health, reproduction, and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease.6’26-32 non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (bhb) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the transition period. as the amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid, their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid (goff, 1999). the amount of ruminally available carbohydrate in prepartum or postpartum diets did not affect ruminal ph, volume, turnover rates, or turnover times. yet, epa and dha may have beneficial effect onneutrophil function by increasing their phagocytosis activ-ity and decreasing the tissue damages due to extracellularrelease of reactive oxygen species (ros).6.3. of the three major subclinical metabolic diseases, the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis, which is common and associated with significant economic loss. when states of hypocalcemia, neb, or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time, they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their full potential. any animal with a bhb concentration > 1.2 mmol/l is considered positive and should receive 300 ml of propylene glycol (pg) for 5 days. whitaker et al (1993) found cows with a better energy status at 14 days postpartum had a reduced interval from calving to the onset of cyclicity and fewer services per conception. force-fed cows had greater plasma glucose concentrations 2 d before calving and less liver triglyceride accumulation at 1 d after calving and tended (p < 0.11) to produce more 3.5% fat-corrected milk (46.1 vs. 41.7 kg/d) during the first 28 d of lactation. fat supplementation in transition dietconjugated linoleic acids (cla) are a family of at least28 isomers of linoleic acid (banni, 2002). concentrations between these 2 values are termed subclinical ketosis (drackley, 1997). based on the average feed intakes observed in this trial, the low monensin group received approximately 208 mg of monensin per day and the high group 399 mg per day. appropriate and timely coordination of these ca regulation mediators is essential, as milk fever results when blood and extracellular ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation, resulting in insufficient ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency and death. reist et al (2003) used milk acetone at 0.4 mmol/l and serum bhba at 2300 umol/l and found significantly reduced milk yield at both cutpoints and increased the risk of endometritis at the milk acetone threshold. prevention depends on several factors including proper transition cow nutrition and management and optimal body condition. milk production is maintained, and field observations suggest that reproductive success also may be improved, although data are lacking. difficulties with pdi provision will also arise where straw or low protein forages might be included in the diet of the dry cow. propylene glycol has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (emery et al, 1964; sauer et al, 1973). however, the authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving, subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause of metritis. if these vfa are not absorbed rapidly they will accumulate in the rumen (schultz et al., 1993). treatments were applied during the first 40 weeks of lactation. it is, therefore, essential to pay particularly close attention to the formulation of rations in this transition period, both pre- and post-partum. although field experience certainly corroborates the benefits of decreasing stocking density in many situations, these observational studies do not lend themselves to truly determine the optimal stocking density, and the optimal stocking density surely varies across farms based upon other grouping management/ facility characteristics. feed space requirement depends on the weight of the cow and the amount of competition for food, estimates of minimal requirements of 0.6m per cow for a dry cow of 600kg bw or 0.8m for a lactating cow. because of this difficulty, we have used animals outside of this short time frame and tried to simulate the same conditions that exist in the true transition cow. in postpartum cows the abomasummay shift to the left without causing overt clinicalsigns (van wimden et al., 2002). impaired immune function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells, are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis and mastitis. offering fresh feed daily and not letting feed heat up or go off helps with intakes also. 14 days) aids in proper recording. to be reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density lipoproteins (vldl). moreover, unhealthycows have lower paraoxanase (pon) activity (bionaz et al.,2007). although increasing insulin by dietary manipulationcan be beneficial for resumption of the estrus cycle, thereis evidence that a high insulin status might have a detri-mental effect on oocyte quality and embryo development(santos et al., 2010). additionally, a cow producing 30 kg of milk/d uses at least 2 kg of blood glucose to synthesize lactose for milk (bell, 1996). close-up diets seem to have proven beneficial in the field in many situations. propylene glycol requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (sauer et al, 1989). non-nutritional components of a good close-up program may be as important, or more important, than specific nutritional strategies. nonetheless,more fermentable carbohydrates such as starch, non-forage fiber, and highly digestible forages should be fedlater in lactation when plasma nefa and bhba decrease.increasing the ruminal starch availability in a diet contain-ing adequate physically effective ndf fed during the first2–3 months may improve milk yield and fertility. relative effects of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of current research. duffield and geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of bhba at or above 1400 umol/l. slowly injecting 0.5 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite, chloride, or borogluconate provide 1.5 to 4 g of mg. furthermore, research generally supports formulation of methionine and lysine in close-up rations at levels similar to those used for lactating cows. these results stand in contrast to the documented benefits of fat supplementation, particularly of rumen-inert fats, during established lactation (staples et al., 1998). there are many theories on why non-structural carbohydrate should be fed to late pregnant dry cows such as developing rumen papillae, acclimatizing rumen microbes and avoiding fatty liver. different problems are caused by rumen acidosis depending on the quantity of acids that accumulate in the rumen. at best it is extremely difficult to amass groups of transition cows suitable to conduct research. even with subclinical ketosis, there is a loss of 1-1.5kg/day of milk production (2). one of the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites, and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown, leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone, acetoacetate, ß-hydroxybutyrate [bhb]) and their release into the bloodstream. for clinical application, primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin e.

11, metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
a retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (nefa), β-hydroxybutyrate (bhba), glucose and calcium (ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (da), clinical ketosis and culling in holstein cows. the economic impacts of maladaptation are important and include increased risk of metabolic disease, reduced milk production, early removal from the herd, and poor reproductive performance. although other treatments are commonly given, there is generally a lack of appropriately controlled studies for these (gordon and others 2013), reducing the strength of evidence available to make treatment recommendations. there isa link between feed intake and subsequent developmentof metritis (huzzey et al., 2007, 2009). additionally, potassium is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in calcium regulation. dohoo and martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four days later. hayirli and collaborators (2002) reported thatprepartum dmi was positively correlated with nfc con-tent of the prepartum diet. when this system is out of balance, hypocalcemia can result.14,15 occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (dmi) that occurs in the periparturient period, which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy balance (neb). these diets may work by controlling overall energy intake by cows and thereby prevent metabolic changes similar to those that develop in fat cows. subclinical disease has also been shown to be very costly to dairy performance. the role of minerals in the diet contributing to dcad can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full dcad strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms, for this to work the dcad value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time of calving. body condition and energy intake dairy cows, like other mammals, undergo a normal cycle of body energy storage and mobilization, with increased body fat storage during mid-gestation and increased body fat mobilization during early lactation. prepare cows 25 days before calving and heifers 32 days before calving. if the low bcs persists to the breeding season, low fertility performance will result (buckley et al, 2003). this represented 4.4 to 6.0% of the mean test day milk production. the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage, supplemented with vitamins and minerals. it is important that the time relative to feeding is consistent from week to week, since urine ph response may fluctuate throughout the day. diets with a net energy for lactation greater than 1.65 mcal/kg were associated with increased risk for displacement of abomasum (cameron et al., 1999). postparturient hypocalcemia occurs due to the massive mobilization of calcium needed to initiate and sustain lactation. it has been proposed that rumen papillae elongate in the presence of increased concentrations of volatile fatty acids, thereby increasing the absorptive surface in the rumen and helping to prevent acidosis after calving. of interest, however, is that by d 14 after calving, force-fed cows had greater plasma nefa concentrations and by d 28 had similar liver triglyceride concentrations. field experiences have been varied; in some cases, changes in close-diets have resulted in apparent improvements in health or productivity, but in other cases results have been frustrating (drehmann, 2000). concomitantly, cytokines impair syn-thesis of negative acute phase proteins (napp) even thoughsome of them are important for normal liver function.metabolic demands associated with late pregnancy,parturition and initiation of lactation are thought toincrease the production of reactive oxygen species (ros)(sordillo, 2005). we recommend chopping the straw or hay such that the long particles are no more than 1.8 inches (4 cm] (33% on each of the 3 sections of the psps]. fat, or lipid, deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as nefa plus the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride. animals—1,038 cows in 20 commercial dairy herds. minimising group changes and stressors such as moving to the home farm on the point of caving is another area for consideration. this may be the result of a reduced energy supply, since milk protein percent is positively associated with net energy balance. the cows were under clinical observation from calving until 60 days in milk (dim) and during this time there were 22 cases of da, 31 cases of clinical ketosis and 39 cows were culled. the general concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for fresh cows. transition cows in particular face the chal-lenge of negative energy balance (neb) and/or disproportional energy metabolism (fattyliver, ketosis, subacute, acute ruminal acidosis); disturbed mineral utilization (milk fever,sub-clinical hypocalcemia); and perturbed immune function (retained placenta, metritis,mastitis). nutrientdemands in late pregnancy are in part met by an increasedstate of insulin resistance in adipose tissue and muscle,coupled with an increased sensitivity to lipolytic agents(bell, 1995), which reduce peripheral glucose uptake andfacilitate nutrient flow away from maternal stores to theplacenta. while prepartum dmi tended (p < 0.11) to be increased by about 1.5 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density, there was no difference in postpartum dmi, milk production, energy balance, or loss in body condition. several aspects of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations, affect dry matter intake, and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient health problems. the liver of ruminants lacks any appreciable quantities of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase (emery et al., 1992). this homeorhetic adaptation is facilitated most importantly by low circulating concentrations of insulin and an uncoupling of the somatotropic axis (bauman and currie 1980, bell 1995) that are typically observed in the postpartum period with subsequent catabolic effects in adipose and muscle tissue (mann and others 2016a, c). for example, milk fever or subclinical hypocalcemia can lead to loss of muscular tonicity resulting in an increased risk of retained placenta and/or displaced abomasums, in spite of retained placenta being classified as a problem related to the immune system. each of these areas has received substantial attention in the past several years and each offers new tools to dairy producers managing cows during this difficult time. when formulating diets to prevent displaced abomasa, several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber, maximization of dry matter intake, and limiting the energy density of the diet. for example, precalving diets based on either high starch or high fibrous byproducts showed few differences in postpartum performance (smith et al., 2005). cows fed steam-flaked corn postpartum produced 2.3 kg/d more milk than cows fed cracked corn during the first 63 d in milk. monitoring criteria are described for each of these key areas, which when considered collectively, will facilitate the assessment of dairy cow health with regard to clinical and subclinical disease. (national research council 2001). cows fed ad libitum consumed about 157% of nrc (1989) nel requirements for dry cows and restricted cows were offered only enough feed to meet 80% of nrc recommendations. these systems increase the ability of identifying individual cows in need of attention and can enable action before clinical signs are visible. (2006). 3, elevated non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to early lactation. however, the increasing thresholds were associated with increasing reductions in milk yield. while dietary fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (grum et al., 1996; douglas et al., 2004, 2006), the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (douglas et al., 2004). peak incidence occurs at 5 days in milk, and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week of lactation. cow-level risk factors are parity, body condition score and season of calving. the aim is to review the efficacy of production disease control measures currently in place, and if necessary to modify them or formulate new ones. achieving group dmi targets above an average of 12 kg per cow per day are possible and based on the above finding should be a goal for the close-up group. these data emphasize the importance of good management that maintains cows healthy and comfortable before calving. the further demand for glucose after calvingoften leads to a fall in circulating insulin in early lactation.genetic selection for milk production has also been associ-ated with a decline in circulating insulin levels (taylor et al.,2004). carbohydrates include both fiber (ndf) and non-fiber (nfc) categories. it is thought that the reproductive statusof a cow is the single most important factor influenc-ing culling decisions on farms and that uterine infectionlikely contributes indirectly to the high rates of involuntaryculling (gröhn et al., 2003). the close-up diet approach is today’s version of the “steam-up diet”, a concept that has been in existence since at least 1928 (boutflour, 1928). the fact that many cows are able to meet this challenge without difficulty implies that the metabolic adaptations necessary to support high milk production are a component of the genetic factors that accompany selection for high milk production. cows having retained placentas were more at risk for developing mastitis and ketosis. these compounds are important as a source of energy when carbohydrate levels are reduced (2). the intense research effort has resulted in better understanding of the biology of cows during this turbulent period, and some insight into how to feed cows during the close-up dry period. our field observations corroborate that stocking transition cows at 80% of headlocks or 2.6 ft (0.8 m] of bunk space per cow is beneficial, and these metrics should be evaluated often. thus, oral ca administration is the preferred route of ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood ca concentration. an improved mechanistic understanding of both physiological and pathological changes during the periparturient period may facilitate development of better feeding and management strategies. many comprehensive reviews on various aspects of transition cow biology and management are available for more information (e.g., bell, 1995; grummer, 1993, 1995; goff and horst, 1997; drackley, 1999; bell et al., 2000; ingvartsen and andersen, 2000; drackley et al., 2001; ingvartsen et al., 2003; jorritsma et al., 2003; overton and waldron, 2004). bell (1995) estimated that the daily demands for fetal and placental growth in the last 3 wk of gestation are 360 g of metabolizable protein and 3 to 5 mcal of net energy. based on high correlations between dmi 1 d before calving and dmi at 21 d after calving (grummer, 1995), a major focus on maximizing prepartum dmi has developed in the field. the early lactation cow is not to be forgotten and the start of lactation is a key time when we must ensure positive metabolic status to ensure optimal health and productivity and later, fertility is achieved. the immune system also enters a period of imbalance during the transition to lactation, and cows experience a decrease in immune function surrounding parturition. in a more recent study, we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases, such as metritis, and also improved fertility (barragan et al., 2021). in postpartum cows, the onset of acidosis ismarked by dampened immune response, depressed intakeof a low fiber or high energy diet when the rumen is stilladapting to transition changes. more recently, however, studies with larger numbers of cows have also identified some negative impacts of subclinical ketosis on fertility. the association between milk fat and hyperketonemia is, presumably, because of increased availability of bhba and fatty acids for milk fat synthesis. cows were housed individually in tiestalls during the dry period. it is well known that overconditioned cows (>4.0 on a 5-point scale) are at greater risk for development of metabolic problems (morrow, 1976; fronk et al., 1980; reid et al., 1986; van den top et al., 1995; smith et al., 1997). the most common compositions include calcium chloride, calcium sulfate, and calcium carbonate, which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent, 70 per cent, and 50 per cent in dairy cattle, respectively. histologicalchanges include endometrial epithelial disruption, leuko-cyte infiltration, and vascular congestion and edema(bonnett et al., 1991; bondurant, 1998). prevention should therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry matter intake. this will rise the serum concentration of mg until the veterinarian can examine and treat the animal further. /head of space at the feed bunk. now, none of the practices above will work if cows are not offered a spot at the dining table, which leads to an important factor: proper stocking density. dry matter intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (bw) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 1.4 % bw in the 7 to 10 d period before calving. (1998) fed 50 multiparous and 25 primigravid holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 d postpartum. more recently, we showed that intravenous glucose administration (fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower bhb concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (mann and others 2017). in addition, the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta, metritis, endometritis, and mastitis.41 as with these disease outcomes, increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success,17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on productive outcomes. other studies have shown no differences in postpartum responses to widely differing nutrient intakes during the close-up period (dewhurst et al., 2000; holcomb et al., 2001; agenäs et al., 2003). this paper reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites, (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds), (3) treatment approaches for affected cows, and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative energy balance. investigators that have sought toincrease the supply of methionine as either rumen- pro-tected methionine (overton et al., 1996; socha et al.,1994) or its analog [2-hydroxy-4-(methylthio)butanoicacid] (piepenbrink et al., 2004), beginning prior to par-turition and continuing through early lactation generallyreported increased milk yield during early lactation. mastitis is a notable exception, but using a "gap" definition (e.g. sck is a condition not recognized clinically until it predisposes cows and herds to higher incidences of transition cow diseases, lower milk production, and lower milk production. further-more, given the interplay between the immune, endocrineand metabolic systems (stofkova, 2009; pittman, 2011),diminished immune competence at calving increases hostsusceptibility to infections (trevisi et al., 2011).physiological conditions associated with insufficientenergy supply predispose dairy cows to metabolic andmicrobial diseases such as milk fever, endometritis, keto-sis, displaced abomasum and retained placenta (drackley,1999; duffield and herdt, 2000). as described above, controlling energy intake of close-up cows so that they meet, but do not dramatically exceed, their energy requirements during this period is a critical target. in irish data, mcnamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four weeks pre-calving. the increased energy intake resulted in less mobilization of adipose tissue as parturition approached and lowered plasma nefa concentrations. in general, subclinical disease incidence is more common than clinical disease. high potassium, as is found in many grass silages, is implicated in the dietary cation anion difference (dcad) or in simple terms high potassium induces a state of metabolic alkalosis. diagnosis of lda is difficultbecause the sensitivity and specificity of these mark-ers in predicting a subsequent lda in the second weekafter calving are low (bhba > 1.0 mmol/l: sensitivity = 0.64and specificity = 0.69, asat > 100 u/l: sensitivity = 0.79 andspecificity = 0.69 .1.1. the decrease in prepartum dmi has classically been attributed to the rapid growth of the fetus taking up abdominal space and displacing rumen volume. of interest, however, is that by d 14 after calving, force-fed cows had greater plasma nefa concentrations and by d 28 had similar liver tg concentrations. choline deficiency in rats resulted in a six-fold increase in liver triglyceride content (yao and vance,1990), and in vitro incubation of hepatocytes isolatedfrom choline-deficient rats with the methyl donors cholineor methionine increased concentrations of phosphatidyl-choline in liver and release of vldl (donkin, 2002). this may be a pessimistic view of the state of affairs, because over this same period, milk production continued to rapidly increase, and diagnostic method sensitivity increased as well as recognition of subclinical disease syndromes; all resulting in postpartum disease events maintaining stable or slightly increasing prevalence rates. this could be 2kg of a dry cow nut, 2kg of barley or 3kg of maize silage or whole crop-wheat silage. 13, minimizing subclinical metabolic diseases in dairy cows

most periparturient abnormalities have some metabolic element as a component of the cause of clinical disease. subclinical ketosis is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases, lost milk production, reduced reproductive performance and increased culling risk. rumen acidosisruminal acidosis can present in different forms rangingfrom peracute life-threatening to chronic forms. logically, reduction of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever, ketosis, metritis, and retained placenta) will reduce the risk for da. test day milk production was negatively correlated with milk acetone levels in several scandinavian projects. this will be discussed subsequently as well. we counsel 10 to 20% on the top screen, 50 to 60% in the middle, and < 40% in the bottom pan, with the long straw or hay particles not more than 4 cm. pronounced accumu-lation of fat in the liver hamper metabolism and impairimmune responses (zerbe et al., 2000). no effect was observed when energy status was evaluated at 21 days postpartum or at first service. glucose is a substance that plays a fundamental role in all living beings. this increase in nutrient demand is partially met by the dmi and partially by the mobilization of body tissues. the last issue of veterinary clinics dedicated to dairy nutrition was published more than 22 years ago.1 in that issue, the dry cow was identified as the key to fresh cow performance, and current dry cow management approaches were described as “management by neglect.”2 by the end of the decade, drackley3 published a seminal article describing “the final frontier” as the need to understand transition cow biology in improving dairy cow productivity. this poses an enormous challenge for the liver that has to synthesize all of this glucose from propionate and amino acids as well as a challenge for other tissues and organs that have to adapt to a reduction of glucose availability. it is not clearwhether neb exaggerates these changes. the transition period is marked by major hormonal changes. manipulation of the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (hayirli et al., 2002) and postpartum lactational performance. it has been said that “there is very little new under the sun”. milk fever is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by some farms. furthermore, in years of low milk price and or poor grazing conditions in the autumn, cows may dry-off with a low bcs. circulating concentration of lep-tin is strongly correlated to body condition score (bcs)and falls in late pregnancy (ehrhardt et al., 2000; watheset al., 2007). opportunities to improve transition cow management hypocalcemia, neb, and immune dysfunction are related; while all occur to some extent during the transition period, our goal as managers is to minimize the severity and duration of these states. the potential role of signaling compounds, such as the inflammatory cytokines released in response to environmental stressors, infectious challenge, and oxidative stress, in the pathogenesis of periparturient disease is under investigation. the general concept of diet changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to cows during the first few weeks after dry-off to the higher nutrient density required for postpartal cows. when switching from a dry-period to an early lactation diet, the mucosa of the rumenwill not have adapted yet, as the papillae are too short andthe resorbing surface too small to deal with the suddenincrease of short-chain fatty acids (scfa) levels (nordlundet al., 1995). consistent with these effects,incubation of ruminant hepatocytes in vitro demonstrateda potential role of linolenic acid in decreasing cellularaccumulation of triglycerides from palmitic acid (masheket al., 2002). thisadaptive strategy is remarkably successful in maintainingblood glucose; despite the large increase in demand circu-lating concentrations of glucose generally only show a brieffall for around 1–2 weeks at calving. when there is a mild accumulation, dmi and production can decline in spite of the cow appearing to be in good health (owens et al., 1998). design—retrospective cohort study. the incidence of subclinical ketosis, defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/l), was reduced by 50% and blood bhba levels were reduced by 40% for the high monensin group. the above treatment will provide the required ca, and the cow will often stand within 30 minutes of administration. in support of this hypothesis, we recently fed cows either a moderate energy diet or a low-energy diet for ad libitum intake during the first 5 wk of the dry period (dann et al., 2003a; dann, 2004). this treatment scheme will help reduce the negative effects of elevated bhb concentrations in herds with a very high prevalence. if ketones are elevated,clinical ketosis ensues (block, 2010). there are two ways to measure stocking density; one of them is based on the lying surface, or stalls, and the other one is based on the feed bunk space. its most significant func-tions are as a component of phosphatidylcholine whichis the predominant phospholipid contained in cell mem-branes in the body, a component of the neurotransmitteracetylcholine, and as the direct precursor to betaine inmethyl metabolism. bhb concentrations can be measured qualitatively or quantitatively with several tests of varying sensitivities and specificities both cow-side or in laboratories. the concentration of plasma insulin decreases dramatically as calving approaches and remains low in the first week postpartum. if the ration is changed abruptly at calving the capacity of the rumen flora to metabolize lactate, the principal acid responsible for acute rumen acidosis, is at a minimum at the initiation of lactation. transition cow nutrition and management have received much attention in the research and popular-based literature in recent years because of the recognition of its importance in the productivity and health of cows. it is, therefore, pertinent to elaborate nutritional strategies to facilitate the passage of the cow through this transition phase; while minimizing health problems and optimizing productivity/ profitability for the remainder of the ensuing lactation. one of the major negative impacts of poor transition cow management is immunosuppression. metabolic alkalosis can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate in hypocalcaemia. provide an adequate mineral supply. frequently it goes unnoticed and is associated with significant economic losses that include increased clinical disease risks, impaired milk production and reduced reproductive performance, and culling losses. one of the important challenges facing the dairy industry is the development, implementation and economic assessment of practical, integrated, blueprints of best practice for prevention of the production diseases and other diseases of the dairy cow. clinical ketosis typically occurs within the first six to eight weeks post calving, and results in rapid loss of condition, decreased milk production, and hard dry feces (10). including rumen buffers in the postpartum diet can also serve the cow well. the experimental model(s) used to assess feeding fat to transition cows. to fulfil the glucose needs as well as other nutrient requirements, the physiological adaptation of the cow allows for alternative sources of energy and amino acids to be used that stem from adipose and muscle tissue breakdown. (1999) fed close-up diets with energy densities of 1.30, 1.49, and 1.61 mcal/kg to cows during the last 28 d before calving. cows from the stephenson study were also evaluated for their neutrophil function. use intermittent milking if all of the other options fail to decrease milk production to 15 kg/day or less. in recent times, genetic selection and improvednutrition have increased milk yield per cow. facilities and cow comfort play a significant role in the development of displaced abomasum; for example, adequate stall design, heat abatement, bunk space, limiting pen moves, and separating animals from different parity groups. dietary fat because of its high energy density, supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving, but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the transition period. even in herds with very low milk fever incidence, subclinical hypocalcemia [sch) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd, predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential.5'25 36 as these associations continue to be understood, the need for strategies to reduce sch incidence is becoming more evident. the combina-tion of lack of adaptation of the rumen to concentrates and ahigh concentrate intake around parturition against a back-drop of general low feed intake may lead to developmentof sara in the post-partum period.3.3. minor et al. for postpartum transition cows nfc should be 38 to 40 % of total dietary dm (drackley, 1998). we advise administration of one dose of oral ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium, with a second of oral ca dose given 12 to 24 hours later. cows fed the high energy diet had about 2.5 times the insulin concentrations as cows fed to meet nrc (2001) energy requirements during the dry period, with similar glucose concentrations and serum nefa that were suppressed only by 29%. moreover, in vitro studiesshowed that cla have a beneficial role in protecting pon1from oxidative inactivation, as well as in its stabiliza-tion in a concentration-dependent action against variousoxidative inactivation systems (su et al., 2003; nguyenand sok, 2004). as a starting point, our recommendations would be to formulate the close-up diet at approximately 1.45 mcal/kg of nel if the group is a commingled cow/heifer group and approximately 1.38 to 1.40 mcal/kg of nel if the group is composed of mature animals and dmi is high. other methods exist to increase energy intake by pre-fresh cows. for example, we (douglas et al., 2002) infused soybean oil into the abomasum of cows for 40 d before expected parturition. for the last 10 to 15 years, research has focused on effects of nutritional management during the “close-up” or “pre-fresh” group to decrease incidence of health problems in fresh cows and to allow higher milk production at peak. (1981) showed that first ovulation in cows occurs 10 d after the nadir in neb. prepartum and postpartum treatments had minimal effects on ruminal fermentation. cows with severemetritis eat 2–6 kg dm less than healthy cows in the 2–3weeks preceding the clinical signs of metritis (huzzey et al.,2007). little scientific information is available for the fiber requirements of dry cows to maintain adequate rumen health and minimize the incidence of displacement of abomasum. elevated bhba concentrations above 1000 μmol/l increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (duffield, 1997; geishauser et al, 1997, leblanc et al, 2005). cows during the last 3 wk before calving seem to consume no more than about 0.8 to 0.9% of their body weight as ndf (j.k. drackley, unpublished data). we will proceed with a review of the biology of the transition cow and the phenomena that mark this period with the goal of developing nutritional strategies. the requirement for the development of rumen papillae and to acclimatise rumen microbes for dry cows coming off a grass silage-based diet and receiving 4kg or less of concentrate feed in a grazing scenario, is unlikely to be significant, if bcs is on target. these hor-monal changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi butalso promote metabolic changes that favor the mobilizationof body fat reserves from adipocytes (drackley et al., 2005;ingvartsen, 2006).the transient temperature elevation in transition cows(>39.5◦c) in the days following calving is mainly due tocommon malaise conditions linked to inflammation andthe release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as a tumornecrosis factor alpha (tnf-), interleukins 1 and 6 (il-1and il-6) (trevisi et al., 2011). regardless of the system, whether a seasonal lower yielding system or a year round higher output system, the principles of transition cow management are the same. validate the pregnancy duration used by your software. typically, far-off diets follow nrc guidelines for dry cows. to maximize dry matter intake, diet composition — especially fiber and energy concentrations —is one of the most critical factors. leblanc et al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/l bhba in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an abomasal displacement. close-up groups and diets the close-up or pre-calving diet approach is today’s version of the “steam-up diet”, a concept that has been in existence since at least 1928 (boutflour, 1928). the animal attempts to supply the needs for milk production by drawing on body fat reserves. based on the above data, it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum bhba should start at about 1400 umol/l. we typically target diet formulation to meet 110 to 120% of energy requirements during this period and metabolizable protein supply for holsteins of over 1,000 g/d. indeed, many ideas and practices cycle in and out of popularity, with new applications or new subtleties. subclinicalendometritis has been defined as the presence of leuko-cytes, mainly pmns, within the uterine lumen, but withoutclinical signs of endometritis (földi et al., 2006; sheldonet al., 2006b; chapwanya, 2008).there is recent evidence that endometritis is associatedwith reduced feed intake, severe negative energy bal-ance, and disturbed immune function (urton et al., 2005;hammon et al., 2006; huzzey et al., 2007). metabolic and physiological changes during thetransition period: inflammation, energy balance,endocrine changes and immunosuppressionthe primary challenge faced by cows is a suddenincrease of nutrient requirements for milk productionat a time when dry matter intake (dmi) and nutri-ent supply lags behind. it is suggested that there should be greater focus on individual animals in order to identify “risk animals”. the enormous and immediate requirement of calcium (ca) for colostrum and milk production, paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition, creates a large ca deficit that takes days to rectify. consideration should be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol and monensin. prepartum and postpartum treatments did not affect digesta kinetics. tuesday and friday) and treat all positive cows. macromineral nutrition to improve calcium status. the metabolic disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum calcium concentrations. occasionally, cows with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs, such as licking and blindness (11). this situation leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (sara) and contributes to reduced dmi and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early postpartum period. ketosis has been shown to significantly reduce milk yield in dairy herds (12,13). cook et al (2001) reported an increased culling risk for ketotic cows measured through milk acetone in a 410 cow study. the local microbial population, needed tometabolize the lactic acid arising from the fermentationof abundant carbohydrates, lags behind, thus disturbingthe balance between production and absorption of fermen-tation end products (nordlund et al., 1995; nagaraja andtitgemeyer, 2007). a summary of research indicated that fat supplementation during early lactation decreased dmi by an average of 0.3 kg/day but the response was variable among studies (chilliard, 1993). similarly, the concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only 97 %. dry off or cull cows that are lame, have high scc or that are disease carriers (e.g. in a study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving, treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves, postpartum fever, retained placenta, metritis and decreased milk production. dry matter intake regulation of dmi during the periparturient period is complex and largely not understood (ingvartsen and andersen, 2000; grummer et al., 2004).  association with periparturient disease several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters, but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and periparturient disease. some research does exist for more defendable cutpoints for subclinical ketosis. the antiketogenic properties of monensin were later investigated in a canadian trial involving two levels of monensin and three groups of 12 holstein cows (sauer et al, 1989). one of the challenges in dairy cattle management is the maintenance of optimum blood calcium concentration during the early postpartum period. the main goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation. however, several studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes, increased mobilization of body tissue, increased circulating concentrations of nefa and bhb, and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and reproductive performance. recent observational data from the university of wisconsin (nordlund and oetzel, unpublished) on effects of pen changes and stocking density are particularly exciting in that regard. in addition, microarray analysis of gene expression patterns revealed extensive differences in hepatic gene expression between overfed and underfed cows (loor et al., 2004). we suggest lactational incidences of das < 3%, clinical milk fever < 2%, and retained fetal membranes of < 8%. the safest way to assess this, to guarantee feed availability, is to use the feed bunk space method. milk fat percentage was increased in subclinically ketotic cows (miettenen, 1994). advances in periparturient nutrition and management strategies have decreased the occurrence of clinical hypocalcemia over the past few decades; however, subclinical hypocalcemia remains an important aspect of transition cow health. herd prevalence testing for hyperketonemia allows a quick snapshot of neb and should be repeated at least when changes in transition cow nutrition or management occur. the conditions described above favor the occurrence of health problems during the transition period. in the periparturi-ent period circulating levels of igg and igm decline (herret al., 2011), neutrophil function is impaired (hoeben et al.,2000; rinaldi et al., 2008) and there is neutrophilia andeosinopaenia (meglia et al., 2005). the milk production response depended on body condition and was 0.85 kg/day at peak lactation in cows with a precalving bcs of 3.25 to 3.75, and was 1.2 kg/day for the first 90 days of lactation in fat cows (bcs 4.0)(duffield et al, 1999a). the nrc (national research council, 2001)guidelines suggest that approximately 1.25 mcal/kg of netenergy for lactation (nel) has to be fed from dry off untilapproximately 21 d before calving, and that a diet contain-ing 1.54 to 1.62 mcal/kg of nel has to be fed during thelast 3 wk preceding parturition. at calving, rumination sharply decreases with a slow increase post calving, and lower rumination time post-partum has been associated with an increased risk of metabolic disorders. avoidance of ketogenic feedstuffs and increased frequency of feeding concentrates have been advocated as preventive measures against subclinical ketosis. therefore, grass and concentrate allowances should also be compared to the cows energy requirement using the ufl system. calving monitoring and proper assistance, along with mild anti-inflammatory treatment, can be beneficial to modulate stress and inflammation after calving and decrease the losses associated with this period. the reason for the equivocal nature of this long-held assumption is that if nfc is not increased, the rumen wall is not prepared for the abrupt increase in concentrates postpartum which will increase the risk for da (shaver, 1998). (1992). the combinedeffects of all these challenges are reduced fertility and milk production resulting in dimin-ishing profits. feeding sfc postpartum also reduced nefa concentrations. post-partum nefa prevalence testing, while expensive and practically challenging, gives the best within-herd evaluation of neb status. although diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates improve energy status of transition cows, provision of adequate amounts of physically effective ndf is important to maintain rumen fill, thereby helping in the prevention of displacement of abomasum. evidence for this phenomenon includes the classic study by garnsworthy and topps (1982) and our own recent data (douglas et al., 2006), showing that cows that are forced away from their desired body condition (either fatter or thinner) before calving eventually converge to a similar body condition score by 4 to 8 wk after calving. an usdastudy has shown that fertility of dairy cattle in northernamerica has rebounded since the incorporation of geneticmerit for daughter pregnancy rate (dpr) with no apparentslowing down in milk yield and fertility (vanraden et al.,2011).there is no arguing that milk yield and reproductiveperformance are the standard economic barometers ofdairy production. similar conclusions have been drawn by others (grummer et al., 2004). the ability to partition available energy for milk production early in lactation (bauman and currie, 1980) has made the role of energy balance a key factor in the study of milk production, reproductive performance, and disease occurrence. results—high serum concentrations of cholesterol and fas were associated with an increased odds of rp. at the same time, animals often show a substantial decrease in dry matter intake. ketosis and fatty liver syndromeketosis is the imbalanced use of body fat by acow common in early lactation and is characterized byhypoglycemia and hyperketonemia (kehrli et al., 2006).insufficient blood glucose levels induce a decline in plasmainsulin, and mobilization of triacylglycerol deposits asnefa (block and sanchez, 2000). use abrupt dry off for cows producing 15 kg of milk/day or less. rumination monitoring technology can be a valuable management tool, allowing for earlier identification and intervention of fresh cows with metabolic disorders as well as assisting with assessment of treatment effectiveness. cows fed a tmr with sfc during the last 4 wk of gestation consumed more energy than cows fed a tmr with cc. however, recent work suggests that there is an earlier peak that occurs in the first two weeks postcalving (duffield et al, 1997). they also decrease the expressionof adhesion molecules involved in inflammatory interac-tions between leukocytes and endothelial cells (calder,2006). fat corrected milk showed no treatment effect. the biological cycles of milk production and reproduction determine dairying profitabilitythus making management decisions dynamic and time-dependent. clinical hypocalcaemia, commonly referred to as milk fever, was first described in 1793, which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase milk production. the negative associations between subclinical ketosis, health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health and production. the most important aspect of dry cow nutrition is to ensure the correct calving bcs. hypocalcemia results when serum calcium concentration falls faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation. having cows in the correct body conditioning score (bcs) at all stages of the lactation cycle should always be a priority. thus, if bcs corrections are required in late lactation or at dry off, a nutritional strategy should be put in place to ensure an appropriate energy allowance is offered. while implementation of close-up diets has been adopted enthusiastically by the dairy industry in the north america, surprisingly few data are available to support their actual effectiveness in decreasing the incidence of health problems or increasing milk yield. overfeeding energy during the dry period is a prominent risk factor. provide comparable feeds in the close-up ration and the fresh cow/early lactation ration
with conventional feeding, increase concentrates by around 350 g per day. increased levels of milk production may be associated with increased fat mobilization and a greater risk of hyperketonemia. the fundamental basis of these physiological changes is to ensure provision of adequate nutrients for the calf, both prenatally and postnatally. however, milk production was significantly increased in choline treated cows and this effect was more pronounced in cows that were overconditioned. indirect costs consist of future losses such as milk production, premature culling of the cow as a result of the disease, and negative impact on future reproduction. we believe that the degree of success relates directly to the net effects of an integrated and dynamic set of factors that include nutritional management [both ration formulation and implementation), facility characteristics, grouping management, and overall cow/herd management. with the increased glucose demand for milk lactose synthesis,237 alternative fuel sources are mobilized. under periods of acute and chronic stress, rumination activity is depressed; changes in rumination in response to stressors can be detected between 12 to 24 h earlier than traditional measurements such as temperature elevation, decreased feed intake, or decreased milk yield. evaluate the option of using the rumensin bolus with your veterinarian. thus the cows entera physiologically unavoidable negative energy balancestatus (grummer et al., 2004; ingvartsen, 2006). overall, research data fail to demonstrate that steam-up diets reliably and repeatedly improve production, body condition, reproduction, or health after calving. we can also monitor some key areas with additional testing. these substances can contribute to laminitis (nocek, 1996). thus, the requirement for concentrate in the dry cow diet of most irish cows (ca 5,000l of milk, 400kg f and p) should be driven primarily by concerns about bcs and silage quality. high-straw, low-energy rations are exciting for their potential to markedly improve health during the transition period. clinical milk fever is well managed on many dairies. literature linking the effects of prepartum nutrition and subsequent fertility is scarce. however, recent studiesnow provide evidence for high milk yield not necessar-ily being associated with low fertility (lópez-gatius, 2003;lópez-gatius et al., 2006; patton et al., 2007). this decrease in insulin combined with a decrease in sensitivity of adipose tissue to insulin and the increase in somatotropin results in a decrease in the synthesis of triglycerides in adipose and favors their mobilization (bell, 1995; lanna and bauman, 1999). the feeding environment is not to be underestimated in the role in the success of the transition period. while fermentation of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen, greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for glucose production. nearly 50% ofthe lda cases are accompanied by neb (heuer, 2000).bhba and aspartate aminotransferase (asat) activity inthe blood, both parameters associated with neb of post-partum cows, may be used to predict the development oflda (geishauser et al., 2000). more important than ration formulation and ration ingredients, close attention should be paid to cow comfort and environmental issues. although controlled evidence specifically focused on pen moves, and their timing during the transition period is largely lacking, the overall practice of streamlining grouping changes during this time appears to have yielded dividends on farms in terms of fresh cow health and calving management. other researchers also showed that clainhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory activityin raw 264.7 macrophages and that it partially occursthrough cla modulating the nuclear transcription factor-b (cheng et al., 2004). based on current literature, and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases, we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to ketosis treatment. typically less than 30 days prior to calving). lately, researchershave been focusing mainly on the isomers cis-9, trans-11and the trans-10, cis-12. single large-herd annual costs due to hypocalcemia have been estimated to exceed $50,000 per year.36 for hyperketonemia, the average component cost per case is estimated to be $117.28 interestingly, the direct costs associated with the disease are only approximately 6% of the total cost, with the remaining 94% of associated costs being indirect, largely future reproductive and milk production losses. it appears that this subclinical rumen acidosis is insidious and omnipresent in transition cows, as well as cows in early lactation. a cow at the end of gestation should receive a diet with a minimum of 35 % ndf in the total dm (shaver, 1993). in a recently reported commercial field trial (sanchez et al., 2003), cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (p < 0.10) for fewer incidents of milk fever, displaced abomasum, mastitis, and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of palm oil. in addition, the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated cows (p=0.09). plasma glucose concentrations tended to be higher, and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet. this paper presents a practical, on-farm approach for the monitoring and prevention of production disease in dairy cattle. in one of our studies, we found that cows that experienced a difficult calving had an elevated inflammatory response in the days after calving, and subsequently, a higher risk of developing diseases compared to cows that experienced a normal calving. these variables were evaluated for an association with development of rp by use of a multivariate logistic regression model. despite many years of research and field emphasis, practical management strategies to minimize health problems while still promoting high milk production have remained elusive. on the other hand, excessive ndf content may limit intake. conclusions and clinical relevance—these associations indicated that prepartum energy metabolism contributes to the development of rp. for example, in the case of mastitis, herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded, all gram-negative cases might not be recorded, and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would be underestimated. duffield et al. milk fever is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle, with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted for centuries. the transition period can be divided into two distinct phases: 5 to 7 d prepartum, characterized by a 30% reduction in dmi, and 0 to 21 d postpartum, during which time intake should increase rapidly. given that lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch], microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 2.2 to 4.4. lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation outlined above. therefore, it is unlikely that dietary fat will reverse the status of the adipose tissue from being catabolic (mobilization of fat) to anabolic (deposition of fat). based on the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase nfc in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to vfa, to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer tmr to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day, to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed), and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the postpartum diet. the immense negative consequences on the metabolism of the early lactation cow due to failure of the transition period are great. recent results (contreraset al., 2004) support managing cows to achieve a body con-dition score of approximately 3.0 at dry off rather thanthe traditional 3.5–3.75. monensin treatment in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 wk postcalving. the end of pregnancy and the beginning of lactation; therefore, represent a time when there is a massive increase in need for glucose. however, there was a conditional benefit of treatment for reduction of the incidence of retained placenta. with herd early-lactation hyperketonemia incidences averaging 40%,13 26 annual costs due to hyperketonemia are not trivial. negative energy balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to early lactation. this integrated approach, should be used in an interdisciplinary way by farmers, veterinarians, nutrition advisors and other relevant professionals for the improvement of animal health and welfare and producer profitability. cows fed either ration ad libitum gained about 0.2 body condition score units during the dry period, whereas restricted cows lost about 0.5 body condition units from dry-off to calving. this method has given us a deeper understanding of the problems faced by these cows, but has also led to some confusion in interpreting data. the direct costs of a disease include labor and veterinary services associated with diagnosis and treatment, therapeutic interventions, and discarded milk required for these interventions. 12, evaluation of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

objective—to identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables, as measured in the week before parturition, that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (rp) in dairy cows. in the same study, we found that cows that experienced dystocia and were treated with a mild anti-inflammatory drug produced almost 10 pounds per day more milk during the first 30 days after calving compared to cows that experienced dystocia but were not treated (barragan et al., 2020a). it is recommended to push feed up every two to four hours, with more frequent push ups (every 30 minutes) during the first two hours after fresh feed is delivered. there can be an average loss of production of 25% or 353.4kg per lactation (10,13) with clinical ketosis. the transition period has typically been defined as the 3-week to 4-week period surrounding calving. this disorder increases the risks of early culling, other disorders, and reduces productivity (geishauser et al., 1998). duffield (1997) also found a significant reduction in milk yield at first dhi test at 1800 umol/l bhba, with a non-significant (p=0.13) reduction at 1600 umol/l. interest in low energy, high forage diets for cows during the dry period has been renewed in the last two to three years. in this study, both the milk samples and the milk weights were obtained on the same day, and thus milk ketone levels and milk production were evaluated concurrently. displaced abomasum (da) is frequently observed in high producing herds (robertson, 1968; robb et al., 1986). blood ca concentration increases rapidly with intravenous administration, peaking within 15 minutes of administration (braun and others 2009). research and field observations indicate that the rations result in better energy balance after calving, with subsequent improvements in health. elevated concentrations of bhba were associated with da, clinical ketosis and culling. cows fed a tmr with sfc during the postpartum period consumed more energy and produced more milk with lower fat and mun contents than cows fed cc. the major difference in rumen function between these 2 stages of lactation can explain the different responses to the same diet. for herds unwilling to test all fresh animals, testing could be focused on animals with high pre-calving nefa concentrations (if available), cows of higher parity, and cows with calving difficulty. because cattleselect concentrates out of component feeding, concentrateintake may be higher than scheduled. overconditioned cows lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows, suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (reid et al., 1986). a subsequent canadian study conducted in 45 dairy herds confirmed that monensin crc reduces the incidence of displaced abomasum (duffield et al, 2002). a 14-week dry period), cows fed average quality grass silage (68 dmd) should have an increase in bcs of approximately 0.5 units before calving. in our experience, commonly used doses of bolus infusion range from 250 to 500 ml of 40 to 50 per cent glucose (total of 125 to 250 g). feeding diets with higher ruminally available carbohydrates to transition cows with high genetic potential for milk yield may be advantageous. bulky rations with the forage base consisting of either straw or mature, low-potassium hay blended with corn silage and a grain mix can be easily sorted by cows if the straw or hay is not chopped, ideally prior to mixing into the tmr. glucose demands can exceed the gluconeogenic capacity of the liver; for example, in the immediate postpartum period, when the need for glucose supply for lactose production rises quickly. elevated plasmanefa mimic intense lipomobilization and alter the abilityof lymphocytes to proliferate or secrete immunoglobulinm and interferon- in response to polyclonal stimulation(lacetera et al., 2004) as well as the viability and oxida-tive burst of polymorphonuclear (pmn) cells (scalia et al.,2006). for the postpartum transition period the recommendations are in the order of 28 to 32 % ndf in the total dm (hutjens, 1995; drackley, 1998). pregnancy rates afterinsemination have declined by 0.45–1% annually in uk andnorthern american herds (royal et al., 2000; butler et al.,2003; dobson et al., 2007) while the culling rate is 20–35%(smith et al., 2000; rajala-schultz and frazer, 2003). this more frequent testing scheme is warranted in order to identify and treat most of the cows with elevated bhb, thus reducing their risk of negative downstream outcomes. 12, monitoring and managing energy balance in the transition dairy cow

dairy cattle are at an increased risk for many diseases and disorders during early lactation (10). as an example, thin vs. obese dry cows will have different dynamics in fat metabolism, dmi patterns, and nutrient needs both pre- and postpartum. ensure that the alleys are not slippery when moving cows. in particular, supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa) to the intestine might be beneficial. it constitutes a turning point in the productive cycle of the cow from one lactation to the next. as many cows will be managed indoors for the immediate early lactation period it is essential, regardless of how big or small the farm, that the early lactation cow diet is calculated to meet energy requirement for the appropriate level of production. most of the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid, amino acids, and the glycerol liberated from adipose. cows unable to adapt to this challenging time are more prone to negative subsequent events, and the associations between excessive neb in dairy cows and these detrimental health effects have been presented by several authors (andersson, 1988, kehrli et al., 1989, duffield, 2000, hammon et al., 2006). first, the rumen flora is adapted to a diet that is low in non-fiber carbohydrates (nfc) during the dry period. the odds of clinical ketosis were 6.3 times greater in cows with serum nefa ⩾ 1.0 mmol/l in the first week after calving. butler et al. although the transition period of 3 weeks pre-calving until 3 weeks post-calving is associated with a peak incidence of production disease, the effects of these diseases on dairy cow health and productivity extend far into the following lactation. holtenius et al. no significant effects on these energy indicators were observed post calving. rogers and hope-cawdery (1980) first described the beneficial effects of monensin for reducing the incidence of ketosis in a herd with a clinical ketosis problem. production diseases of the dairy cow are caused by a level of production inconsistent with nutrient intake, provision of an inadequate diet, an unsuitable environment, an inappropriate breeding policy or various combinations of these factors. for example, vandehaar et al. however, the lack of repeatable success with close-up dry period nutrition programs in decreasing the occurrence of health disorders and increasing subsequent milk production has been frustrating and problematic to farmers, nutritionists, and researchers (drackley, 1999). while most people readily realize the direct costs associated with a disease, interestingly these make up a relatively small part of the total cost of a disease. oral calcium products differ in their chemical composition and biological availability. hypocalcemia and hyperketonemia, as mentioned above, have an effect on proper immune function, thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or calcium deficiencies. severe neb also can lead to fatty livers and compromised liver function essential in all metabolic functions including detoxification. at the cow level, the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum bhb > 0.6 to 0.8 mmol/l; pre-partum nefa > 0.3 to 0.5 meq/l; post-partum nefa > 0.7 to 1 m eq/l; and post-partum bhb > 1.0 to 1.4 mmol/l.27 at the herd level, negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above.6-32 herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity, especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes.33 an initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere,33 e.g., test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to 14 dim. further, diseases like da, retained fetal membranes, and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and lag either. improved identification of cows with poor adaptation should be the goal on any dairy farm. provide a minimum of 30 in. therefore, maintenance of physiologic plasma mg concentrations depends on continuous dietary mg absorption. major minerals, trace elements and vitamins are also important and the dry cow diet should include a specific dry cow mineral. the average duration of a pregnancy is 280 days (valacta, 2020). although this is a broad topic, i will try to summarize it in a few sentences. if the herd is thin in late lactation (eg. monitoring performance metrics that have little momentum, bias, and lag will help dairy farms reach their goals. most of the potential applicationof choline within transition cow nutrition has focusedon its role in lipid metabolism because phosphatidyl-choline is required for synthesis and release of vldl bythe liver. at least 50% of alldairy cows are thought to go through a temporary periodof subclinical ketosis in the first month of lactation. data from ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period, suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the prepartum period, which clearly indicated that dmi was compromised in these animals.32 furthermore, nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the post-partum period. both subclinical ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk of culling. however, if the krebs cycle gets overloaded the acetyl co a is shunted off to produce ketones (acetoacetic acid, acetone, and β hydroxybutyrate or bhb). increasing starch also tends to improve total dmi, diet digestibility, and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (grummer, 1995), at least over the short-term in the close-up diet. if aiming for a negative dcad by feeding anionic salts, monitoring urine ph weekly, and ensuring it's adequately acidified is good practice. it commonlyoccurs in high producing dairy cows more than 26 dayspostpartum (sheldon et al., 2006b). given the lack of significant differences, or in fact even improvements in postpartum dmi for cows that were restricted-fed (agenäs et al., 2003; douglas et al., 2006) or limit-fed (holcomb et al., 2001) during the dry period, this relationship may have been overemphasized or misinterpreted. methyl donorscholine is a quasi-vitamin that has a variety of functionsin mammalian metabolism. the major interactions betweenthe immune, endocrine and metabolic systems in dairycows during the transition period are summarized in fig. we typically target energy intake of cows during the close-up period at 110 to 130% of energy requirements. ( 2003) also observed a significant precalving reduction in nefa. in the first and second weeks after calving the serum ca concentration was associated with subsequent culling. treatment with dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher bhb concentrations in a study involving four herds (tatone and others 2016a). extracellular mg is essential for normal nerve conduction, muscle function, and bone mineral formation. theeffect of fish-oil on cell-mediated immune response hasbeen investigated in periparturient dairy goats (agazziet al., 2004), where it has been shown to modify the ratiobetween mononuclear and polymorphonuclear cells andto improve some aspects of the cell-mediated immuneresponse. 8, new concepts in nutritional management of dry cows

dry cow nutrition has been an active area of research over the last half-century. dohoo and martin (1984) found more positive milk ketone tests in the first versus the second month of lactation, and observed that the peak prevalence of hyperketonemia occurred in the third and fourth week of lactation. in general, these are difficult areas in which to conduct controlled research because of the need for replicated pen designs if studying group-housed cows for many factors. this allows for timely identification of individual cows in need of intervention as well as group variations that can be used to evaluate transition cow facilities and management practices. most information must be extrapolated from studies of cattle at other stages of lactation. walsh et al (2004) have identified reductions in fertility starting at a cutpoint of 1100 umol/l and duffield et al (2005) have identified increased culling risk at 1400 umol/l bhba. randomised controlled trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment of hyperketonaemia. concentration of plasma progesterone, which is high in gestation, rapidly falls at calving and there is a transitory elevation in estrogens and glucocorticoids in the periparturient period. however, the transition cow is likely to be in a state of lipolysis predominantly because of her energy balance status and her hormonal profile (low insulin and high cortisol) that does not favor body fat deposition. it is not uncommon when questioned about the control strategy used on farms to prevent hypocalcaemia that there is none. it occurs because the energy demands for early lactation milk production cannot be completely met by feed intake. thus, monitoring and managing dairy herds to decrease the incidence of da is of extreme importance for the sustainability of dairy production and to improve animal health and wellbeing. in-line milk analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical neb disorders and mastitis. a randomized clinical trial was conducted in 21 commercial dairy herds. the liver is central to many of these processes, including gluconeogenesis and metabolism of fatty acids mobilized from adipose tissue. the costs of endometritisinclude reproductive inefficiency, culling, treatment costs,milk discard, labor and increased risk of residues in foodproducts.6. on a molecular level,these fatty acids also decrease the production of classi-cal inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor (tnf)and interleukin-6 (il6). metritis and da), the total cost per case is almost $290. a potentialrole for methionine in bovine ketosis has been speculatedfor more than 30 years (mccarthy et al., 1968; watermanand schultz, 1972). given that the occurrence of diseases inperiparturient cows center on the three principal axes ofdisproportional energy metabolism, disturbed mineral uti-lization and perturbed immune function, there is a needfor further research to identify ways of regulating immuneresponses for preventing transition diseases.because the disorders mentioned above are interrelatedand can occur as a complex in one animal or in a herd, herdhealth management strategies designed to prevent thesediseases are urgently needed. this review will begin with a discussion of the drop in intake during the transition period and how that drop relates to cow health. the feed-intake of the periparturientcow varies considerably and is difficult to estimate, espe-cially when cows are kept in larger groups. current interest and support for the close-up diet of higher nutrient density (i.e., more cereal grains and less forage) stems from an elegant experiment by bertics et al. for holsteins, this is in the range of 16 to 18 mcal/day of nel. general guidelines since ketosis occurs in early lactation, recommendations for prevention have focused on the nutritional management of the dry and transition cow. however, we will try to review the literature related to specific nutrients studied in this period of the cow's production cycle. displaced abomasum (da) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left da (lda) side in cattle, with lda being more frequently diagnosed than right da. sufficient nonfiber carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression of ketogenesis. more frequent sampling may be indicated when there are significant changes in diet formulation, management, or environment. consequently neb and reduced dry matter intake are aggravated. direct microbial supplements are also being investigated with the aim of controlling lactic acid production (kung, 1999). this may be due to fat mobilization and triglyc-eride deposition in liver cells, which cause liver damageand dysfunction (turk et al., 2004), reduction in total bloodcholesterol and high density lipoproteins (hdl) (turk et al.,2005) to which pon is bound in the blood, associated withan increase in oxidative stress (turk et al., 2004, 2005) or acombination of these.due to the lower levels of circulating igf-i, not onlythe proinflammatory response modulated by this hormonelowered but also the onset of the first ovulation after par-turition is also delayed (kawashima et al., 2007; o’connoret al., 2008).inflammation postpartum, coupled with the increasedcellular metabolism, upregulated immune gene expres-sion and mitochondrial uncoupling further increase energyrequirements (puigserver et al., 2001; drackley, 2006;ingvartsen, 2006). this transition period is often considered to occur from 3 weeks pre-partum to 3 weeks post-partum (grummer, 1995, drackley, 1999), as during this timeframe homeorhetic regulation of metabolic functions is necessary in order to accommodate parturition and lactogenesis (bauman and currie, 1980). it seems logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets, especially when fed as total mixed rations (tmr), should help maintain dmi around calving and promote more rapid increases in dmi after calving, with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders. we can then use these tools to improve breeding decisions and select for traits that optimize transition cow health and immune competence. from the discussion above, it is obvious that preventing the decline in dmi prepartum, increasing dmi rapidly postpartum, and making certain that energy density is as high as possible in both transition phases are the most important control points for these cows. most dynamic activities will be better implemented if they are consistently measured and monitored. it seems logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets, especially when fed as a total mixed ration (tmr), should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving, with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders. sequence of offering feeds may affect intake, but relative degradabilities of dietary protein and starch need to be considered. (1992). recently, monensin crc treatment 3 wk prior to calving was found to significantly increase liver glycogen 3 wk postcalving (zahra, 2004). stephenson et al (1997) conducted a small study involving 24 cows from 2 farms where monensin crcs were administered 50 d precalving. the treatment of these animals can be challenging because the insertion of the intravenous needle can initiate clonic convulsions that may injure the veterinarian and/or the animal. internally consistent definitions are important for this recording to be meaningful and avoiding bias. however, the accumulation of these compounds can lead to ketosis (2). over the last 20 years, it has become common practice to feed rations of higher energy and nutrient density during the close-up (pre-fresh) period, generally beginning around 3 weeks before expected calving. another proposed benefit of additional grains in the prepartum diet is to adapt the ruminal tissues and the rumen microbial population to the type of diet that will be fed after calving (goff and horst, 1997). research results have been mixed in terms of feeding fat to transition cows; where some show a benefit and others do not (skaar et al., 1989; grum et al., 1996; douglas et al., 1998; bertics and grummer, 1997). verify the dry off & fresh monitoring report. dohoo & martin (1984) could find no direct association between the two conditions. this release of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies, acetone, acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate (bhb) (11). the normal concentration of plasma ketones (using bhb as an indicator) is less than 10 mg/dl. major metabolic transitions occur in a cow’s body as she converts from a non-lactating to a lactating state and undergoes the stress of parturition. cla supplementationincreases dmi and some of the negative acute phase pro-teins such as albumin and cholesterol (trevisi and bertoni,2008; esposito et al., 2013). cows fed steam-flaked corn had lower blood urea n concentrations during the prepartum period and lower plasma nonesterified fatty acid concentrations during the prepartum and postpartum periods. this results in cases of severe/recurrent hypocalcaemia wherein a cow has received multiple bottles of injectable ca over the course of a few days but yet is still recumbent. provide access to the ration 23 hours out of 24. certain species of bacteria and protozoa in the rumen are extremely sensitive to acidosis and release endotoxins and histamine. various components of cow health, including infectious and metabolic diseases, physical form and composition of diets during the transition period, and cow comfort, are factors linked to the pathogenesis of da. if at least 2 consecutive prevalence tests independently result in fewer than 15% of the animals testing positive, then one could consider stopping this testing and treating protocol and monitor the prevalence every 2 weeks as described above. it was suggested thatoptimizing dmi requires different diets at different stagesof the lactation because dmi is controlled by oxidationof fuels (fatty acids, propionate, lactate, and amino acids)in the liver in early lactation and by gut fill as lactationapproaches peak (allen et al., 2009). the study indicated that early post-partum serum bhba, nefa and ca concentrations have potential as indicators of disease and culling risk in dairy cows. feeding management of dry cow rations. of interest is that cows in both ad libitum and restricted groups reached the same body condition by about 5 wk after calving. guidelines for formulating these rations are discussed, including the need to carefully interpret calculated energy values. it is speculated that theydirectly target the inflammatory gene expression path-ways trough toll-like receptor 4 (lee and hwang, 2006).more recently, diets enriched with 3 fatty acids havebeen reported to modulate immune responses, such aslps-induced febrile response (farran et al., 2008). in our experiments, liver slices from overfed cows had a lower capacity for oxidation of fatty acids, and greater esterification capacity, compared with cows fed the lower energy diet (litherland et al., 2003). thin cows have been proven to have a significantly increased risk of lameness, uterine health issues and retained foetal membranes. it is unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat, or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to subclinical ketosis. no milk production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest bhba concentrations and were at decreased risk of subclinical ketosis. magnesium supplementation is also important; 20-25g of supplemental magnesium is often required in silage-based dry cow diets. overall, there were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta, clinical mastitis, metritis, endometritis, ketosis, displaced abomasum, or lameness. another fundamental player in milk fever prevention is potassium. a significant body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine production diseases. they advocated for elimination of group moves 2 to 5 d before calving and shortening of the period spent in a post-fresh monitoring group. equally as important as diet formulation, however, is feeding management. ensure that there is adequate ventilation to minimize heat stress. significant correlations between the herd prevalence of hyperketonemia and herd mean intervals from both calving to first service and calving to last service have been noted but this is herd level data and doesn’t necessarily imply a cow-level association (andersson, 1988). access to clean water is essential and an adequate area where cows can drink that is sufficient for the size of the dry cow area, fresh drinking water is essential to maximise feed intake. during the far-off period, macromineral considerations such as potassium are not of great concern, thus a wider array of forages and feeds are acceptable to form the basis of diets. the first key area, already addressed, in the control of milk fever is the control of body condition score, maintaining bcs in the desired range at calving is a fundamental point in preventing milk fever. nutrition has been implicated in the incidence of da and these nutritional factors are controllable (coppock, 1974; cameron et al., 1998). the importance of low-stress and comfortable environments for transition cows is discussed below. however, herd level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management, feed quality and nutritional programs, cow comfort, environment, and other variables that influence dry matter intake. poor transitions also result in milk income losses. 4, methods of measurement and implications of abnormal calcium concentrations in fresh dairy cows

hypocalcemia is a prevalent disorder in the early postpartum period. currently, nefa concentrations can only be measured quantitatively in laboratories. in cases where veterinary examination and treatment needs to be delayed and the owner is not comfortable undertaking an iv infusion, a magnesium enema (box 2) is a quick and safe alternative. you can stop treating all cows and move to the test-and-treat positive cow scheme or remain in the treat-all-cows protocol. 1, monitoring negative energy balance in transition cows for better dairy herd results

introduction 

most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (neb) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (hayirli et al., 2002). the reported prevalence of subclinical ketosis ranges widely. mean annual milk fat yield was significantly higher in both subclinically ketotic and clinically ketotic cows compared to normal cows (kauppinen, 1984). the concentration of plasma somatotropin increases dramatically and rapidly postpartum. dairy operations, large and small, continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases around calving. methionine and lysine are frequently con-sidered to be the most limiting amino acids for synthesis ofmilk and milk protein (national research council, 2001).these two amino acids also have potential roles in mito-chondrial b-oxidation of fatty acids (carnitine biosynthesis)in liver and export of triglycerides as vldl (apolipopro-tein b100 biosynthesis) (bauchart et al., 1998). the current working hypothesis under investigation in our laboratory is that extended periods of feeding diets high in starch and/or total energy to dairy cows during late gestation induce changes analogous to insulin resistance in other species, even in the absence of visible overconditioning. the 3 pufa may modulate the expression ofinflammatory genes by down-regulating activation of sometranscription factors (sethi et al., 2002) and inflammatorycytokines (zhao et al., 2005). 9, new approaches to feeding dry cows

interest has surged recently in use of highstraw low-energy diets for dry cows. their analysis revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta, milk fever, and mastitis. for these reasons, the transition from late gestation to early lactation is a dynamic period for dairy cattle, during which most infectious and metabolic diseases are likely to occur (goff and horst, 1997, mallard et al., 1998, ingvartsen et al., 2003). tao and dahl reviewed the literature related to heat stress and the implementation of heat abatement strategies during the transition period and the effects on the dam and the calf.44 their summary suggests remarkably consistent and beneficial results of heat abatement both on the subsequent performance of the dam and also the calf through its developmental cycle. the key areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management, negative energy balance, hypocalcaemia, rumen health and trace element status. therefore, instead of being adaptedgradually to the high-energy diet, the cows in the earlypost-partum period may be confronted with a rapidly risingenergy-content of the ration (rollin, 2006). (2000) reported that elevated glucose concentrations, such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance, had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for abomasal displacement. this nuance affects rumen function in 2 ways. however, there is much variation in the magnitude of the neb after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (garnsworthy, 1989), the severity of the depression in dmi (bertics et al., 1992), the quality of the ration, and season. although immediate therapy is imperative to prevent progression to death, it is important to note that additional ca is required to counter the ca deficit until the cow returns to normal feed intake. thus it is a costly condition. diseases also negativelyimpact on net earnings of a dairy enterprise. in addition, cows with nefa concentrations ⩾ 1.0 mmol/l were 3.6 times more likely to be culled within the following 2 months. by formulating high-bulk tmr that will limit total energy intake but provide adequate amounts of protein and other nutrients, cows can be allowed to consume feed ad libitum and meet their requirements, while preventing overconsumption of energy. variation in average urine ph from week to week can indicate inconsistency in ration mixing or changes in feed ingredient composition. as has been well-documented previously and supported by recent research,30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated nefa concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders, lower milk production, and poorer reproductive performance. that is, ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead to ketosis. although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data, the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5). we will see in the next sections some of the etiology and preventive measures for these problems and the nutritional considerations related to these 3 axes. the test characteristics (sensitivity and specificity) influence prevalence, as does the timing and intensity of sampling. the focus of this paper is on potential physiological and pathological mechanisms related to energy metabolism that may cause or predispose cows to periparturient disease. consistent and accurate recording of actionable metrics can allow for timely interventions to ensure the dairy is proactively addressing transition cow opportunities. ideally, 30 inches of feed bunk space is required per cow in the pen, which will be equivalent to having a stocking density of 80%-85% based on number of stalls in the pen. however, difficulty arises if either the pdin or the pdie value of grass silage is less than 60g/kg of dm. most of the loss in milk production occurred in the first 100 days of lactation and amounted to 328 kg loss in fat corrected milk yield over 200 days. the transition period is commonly accepted as the period from three weeks pre to three weeks post calving. thus,the conclusion reached by many is the existence of anoverall antagonism between milk yield and reproduction(vanraden et al., 2004; chagas et al., 2007; lucy, 2007;mccarthy et al., 2007; mee, 2007). in addition, it has recently been shown that nutritional management in the early dry period, i.e. several options are available to reduce the rate of relapses (table 4). partial dcad is another option for control of milk fever if implemented correctly. authors of other chapters will be able to provide more depth related to each of these areas - the purpose of this section is to highlight key areas of management and principles within each of these areas for best practices. displaced abomasumleft-displaced abomasum (lda) is a disorder thatoccurs mainly in high producing dairy cows postpartum(geishauser, 1995). providing glucogenic precursors to a cow that is already hyperglycaemic is potentially harmful and can be appetite-supressing (g. oetzel, personal communication; s. borchardt, personal communication). post-partum nutritional strategies and fresh cow diets. in addition, the odds ratio decreased from 0.7 at 1100 umol/l bhba to 0.31 at 1900 umol/l bhba, implying in a sense a dose effect of ketone concentration. the use of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol, and ionophores may also aid in the prevention of ketosis. approaches to reducing the prevalence of low serum calcium include reducing potassium in feedstuffs precalving and adding chlorinated supplements to the close-up diet. the tissues produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to nefa for utilization. no more than 10% of cows 0-60 in milk should have milk fat: protein >1.5 and no more than 10% early lactation cows should have a milk protein <3.05. one of the major areas of focus by cook and nordlund was the issue of the number of pen moves made during both the prepartum and post-partum periods.8 in many freestall transition management systems, it is not uncommon for cows to make 5 to 6 moves during the 6-week period around calving. the focus has been to discuss (1) the general physiological regulation and adaptations that are believed to be important for a successful transition to lactation, (2) for each disease the disease incidence rate, risk factors, aetiology and pathophysiology and (3) feeding and management strategies to prevent diseases. 1.2. re¬ search in post-partum systemic inflammatory response and the effects on health and productivity in transition dairy cows has yet to clarify to what extent and persistency inflammation should be considered a normal adaptive response.4 from a management perspective, overcrowding, comingling of fresh heifers and mature cows, competition at the feedbunk, excessive pathogen pressure, heat stress, and stressful handling situations all affect the ability of the transition cow's immune system to adequately react to infectious challenges. hence, the use of sedatives (eg, xylazine) administered intramuscularly can decrease this risk of injury. common metabolic problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes, milk fever, ketosis, and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of ovarian cycles. the importance of the periparturient period in determining health, productivity, and profitability has been underscored by the intense interest in nutrition and management of dairy cows during the transition period over the last two decades. thus, feeding diets with higher ruminal carbohydrate availability during the transition period may have benefits on animal health and productivity. if dietary nfc increases abruptly at calving, with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates, the amount of vfa produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of vfa in the rumen. strong evidencehas emerged of inflammatory mediators directly induc-ing metabolic disturbances (trevisi et al., 2010). their basis for this was a collection of older studies that suggested that social adaptation to new groups ranged from 48 h to 7 d, with low-rank cows more affected by the regrouping. cows received total mixed rations containing either cracked corn or steam-flaked corn beginning 28 d prior to expected calving date. in this article, a historical perspective is provided on transition cow nutrition and management research and its impact on current practices. a factor that has not received a lot of specific attention and is superimposed on all of this is the issue of protein requirements. for cows that will be fed 8kg of concentrate or more in early lactation, a conservative approach in keeping with the normal digestive physiology of the cow would be to feed 1kg of starch in the last woweeks pre-calving. given the bulkiness and potential palatability challenges of these recommended diets, it's prudent to monitor the particle size and using the penn state particle separator weekly. diets were fed until 63 d in milk. there are a variety of factors that we should consider in assessing a position on feeding fat to transition cows prior to seeing more definitive work on the subject. feeding a lower energy furthermore, dann et al. heat stress abatement. calcium homeostasis has a key role in the health of the cow at calving, clinical (the tip of the iceberg effect) and subclinical hypocalcaemia have a major detrimental effect on the early lactation cow in terms of health and production. although controlled research on commingling is even more lacking than that for stocking density, it is worth noting that the effects of stocking density reported by nordlund et al above were confined to milk yield responses in primiparous cows.29 pen moves. dietary carbohydrates adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function, prevent displaced abomasum, and achieve high dmi. farm profitability and animal well-being both suffer. there are a huge number of factors that determine energy allowance for example feed space, weather, grazing conditions, and silage qualities are all important. a negative energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta, metritis, and mastitis through impaired immune function. over the last 2 decades, much intensive research has been completed in addressing transition cows relative to nutrient requirements, physiologic adaptations, and metabolic associations with periparturient disease; yet, dairy farms continue to be plagued by high prevalence of costly fresh cow disorders adversely affecting productivity and reproductive performance (table 1). status-oriented strategies for optimising dairy cow health, reproduction and production are suggested that aims at securing a desirable status of epithelia, metabolism and immune function in different cells, tissues or organs through surveillance and health and production management based on indicators. as rumen motility and mixing decline so does rumination, which reduces the amount of saliva flowing into the rumen. evidence from our group and miner institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in fresh diets. it is essential that if we seriously want to assess transition that we assess all areas within our remit so any potential pitfalls can be identified. the somatotropin, in concert with elevated cortisol, stimulates the liver to produce more glucose. in the first week after calving, cows with serum bhba ⩾ 1000 μmol/l had 13.6 times greater odds of developing da than cows with lower values. it is beyond the scope of this presentation to adequately describe this subject area, however, there are numerous publications dealing with its description and detection (yokoyoma and johnson, 1988; nordlund, 1994; allen and beede, 1996; hall, 1999). by contrast, kauppinen (1984) showed a significant positive correlation between both the bhba and acetoacetate concentrations in blood and milk yield. however, recent research has indicated that this likely is not a large factor in transition success of cows fed more typical close-up diets (andersen et al., 1999; ingvartsen et al., 2001; reynolds et al., 2004). the potential remains for appropriate fat supplementation strategies to manipulate liver metabolism. the use of a teat sealant is strongly recommended when there will be a long dry period. in farms with aggressive fresh cow programs, incidence of displacement of abomasum is below 2% of the total cows calving per year, and these herds can feed prepartum diets with less than 35% ndf, therefore higher energy diets. in the experiment from our laboratory mentioned earlier (douglas, 2002; douglas et al., 2006), we fed two diets during the dry period either at ad libitum intake or at restricted intake. if there are a lot of fresh cows with high scc, discuss dry cow management with your veterinarian because infections observed during the first 50 days of lactation have often been acquired during the dry period. carbohydrate formulation of the prepartum dieta concept that has been perpetuated through the sci-entific literature (rabelo et al., 2003) is that diets higherin non- fiber carbohydrates (nfc) content than traditionaldry cow diets must be fed prior to calving to promotedevelopment of ruminal papillae for adequate absorptionof volatile fatty acids produced during ruminal fermenta-tion. next, three transition cow management strategies will be addressed: 1) supplementing monensin, 2) shortening dry periods, and 3) manipulating prepartum photoperiod. contents of total lipid and tg in liver at d 1 postpartum were negatively related to decreases in dmi during the last 3 wk (r= –0.63 and –0.63), last 2 wk (r= –0.67 and –0.65), and last 1 wk (r = –0.42 and –0.38) prepartum (figure 2). evidence is accumulating that increasing nutrient density of the pre-calving diet by addition of cereals actually may increase the precalving decline in dmi (rabelo et al., 2003; grummer et al., 2004). furthermore, strong consensus exists regarding the importance of also supplementing mg during the prepartum period to help with the homeostatic mechanisms responsible for increasing blood ca. other studies have shown 3 no differences in postpartum responses to widely differing nutrient intakes during the close-up period (e.g., kunz et al., 1985; dewhurst et al., 2000; holcomb et al., 2001; agenas et al., 2003; rabelo et al., 2003). koller et al (2003) found increased concentrations of ketone bodies in the first 6 weeks post calving delayed conception. although other feeding standards organisations (nrc, 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the pdi allowances, research work carried out in ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage based diets. in order to test for hypocalcaemia, the timing of the sample is important as it needs to be taken within 24 hours of calving making decent sample sizes difficult (10-12 cows/10% of the group). therefore, the best approach to manage this group of animals is by addressing these challenges. the metabolites non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (bhb) are common measures of neb and/or ketosis in transition animals (duffield et al., 2009). poor adaptation through this period, expressed as excessively elevated concentrations of non-esterified fatty acids (nefas) pre- or post-partum and elevated concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate post-partum, increases an individual animal’s risk of post-partum disease, removal from the herd, reproductive difficulty, and reduced milk production. this combination creates a negative energy balance. this makes perfect sense in that the liver is producing lipoproteins for other tissues and should not be able to extract them from the blood when it has an alternative, i. e. nefa, as an energy source. short-term cultures of liver slices from imme-diate postpartal cows displayed decreased capacity forfatty acid esterification when incubated with a mixtureof linoleic and linolenic acids (piepenbrink and overton,2003). during this period, cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day, and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between feed deliveries. reliable tools to assess theimmune status of the cow must be developed to elucidatethe immune responses of peripartal disorders. it is also interesting to note that nrc (2001) advocate a 70% increase in energy density in the close-up dry cow diet. by measuring the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen, the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can be estimated. an increase in ruminal carbohydrate availability during the postpartum period enhanced milk production, but had variable results on ruminal fermentation. the concentration of plasma insulin continually declines in the transition period until calving and that of somatotropin increases rapidly between the end of gestation and the initiation of lactation. considerable progress has been made in recent years in describing the adaptive changes in the liver and other organs in normal and abnormal states, but this knowledge has not yet identified unequivocally the key steps that might be compromised during development of metabolic disorders. fat accumulation may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis, which in turn may predispose cows to other metabolic abnormalities. for example, a round hay feeder with an 8-foot diameter and 18 sections will allow 15 cows to eat at the same time. in particular, the last two decades have seen intensive interest in management of cows during the so-called “close-up” or “transition” period, generally considered to be about the last 21 days before calving through 21 days after calving (grummer, 1995). the sub-clinical form of acidosis (sara) is present in a large numberof dairy cows with impaired immune function (krause andoetzel, 2006). it may be that advances in genetics and feeding management have pushed the metabolic challenge closer to calving. 2,adapted from allen and co-workers (2009) and calder(2006) summarize the mechanism of action of the mostcommon nutritional supplementation strategies discussedbelow.6.1. while these hormones are causing a reduction in dmi there is an increase in nutrient requirements by the cow to support fetal growth, mammogenesis, and lactogenesis (bell, 1995; grummer, 1995). the “new concepts” to be discussed in this paper fall into that category. walking the farm, measuring feed space, looking at the cows, body condition scoring is very important. these energy densities are adjusted based upon actual dmi of cows on farms to achieve the overall targets for energy intake during the close-up period described above. however, data from burke et al (2010) for new zealand dairy cows indicates that feeding nonfibrous carbohydrate in the late pregnant dairy cow diet had no effect on reproduction in grazing dairy cows. a topdress of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect bhba, nefa, liver glycogen or liver triglyceride. herds vary also in their ability to detect and react to changes in each of these areas, which also contributes to their degree of overall success in transition period management. to this end, an understand-ing of the complex immunological processes at play in thetransition cow is a must.3. however, we caution the administration of propionate in the first day or two after calving when cows often have high glucose concentrations, particularly immediately after calving (vannucchi and others 2015, ruoff and others 2017). glucose is an equally important energy source for the ovary and the reduced glucose availability in the beginning of lactation can negatively impact the re-establishment of ovarian activity after calving (rabiee et al., 1999). in addition, the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (bhb) and fatty acids. kauppinen subsequently reported that subclinically ketotic cows had significantly higher annual milk yields than nonketotic cows. the ruminal microflora can be characterized ascellulolytic developing a ph within the higher physiolog-ical range when fermenting a diet with a high content ofstructured feedstuffs. the principal metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver, ketosis, subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever, sub-clinical hypocalcemia, udder edema); and problems related to the immune system (retained placenta, metritis, mastitis). the most consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis, clinical ketosis and displaced abomasum. hepatic phospholipids and tg can be enriched with pufa if intestinal supply is increased. results of this experiment indicated that under our controlled conditions, there was no advantage to feeding higher-energy diets during the dry period to try to add body condition to cows in moderately thin body condition going into the dry period. because dmi of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving, increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total feed intake. we advise hyperketonemia (defined as bhb concentration >1.2 mmol/l) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for first-parity heifers. dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (hayirli et al., 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum, due to milk production, the demands for glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements (bell, 1995). the group of cows that calve from march on are most at risk of over-conditioning as this group often have a prolonged dry period. cows with serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 1.8 mmol/l and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 3.0 times and cows with serum bhba concentrations above 1400 umol/l were 1.4 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation, after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (duffield et al, 2005)  thresholds for defining subclinical disease most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease are arbitrary. most prepartum diets contain between 30 to 40% ndf and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the specific herd. furthermore, supplemental fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation (chilliard, 1993). these positive responses in production do not appear to relatedirectly to effects of methionine and lysine on hepaticlipid or glucose metabolism (bertics and grummer, 1999;piepenbrink et al., 2004; socha et al., 1994). consequently, fat supplementation in the early postpartum diet is not recommended if early postpartum cows can be grouped separately and fed a separate diet containing no supplemental fat. clinical ketosis is defined as a concentration greater than 35 mg/dl. these increased amounts of propionatesupport hepatic gluconeogenesis and the production ofmicrobial protein, providing the diet contains sufficientrumen-degradable protein, which in turn satisfies proteinrequirements for maintenance, pregnancy, and mammo-genesis. cur¬ rent research is under way to better define the epidemiology of hypocalcemia on today's large commercial herds with high-producing cows. during both the prepartum and postpartum transition period cows require more energy than they are able to consume resulting in the neb and the concomitant loss of body weight (condition) to supply the necessary energy even in healthy cows (bell, 1995). prevention of hypocalcemia through peripartum nutritional management is key. accuracy and consistency in feed delivery and composition are paramount to a successful transition feeding program. in another large study including cows from 20 herds, the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (seifi and others 2007). yieldsof milk and fat-corrected milk have generally increased inresponse to feeding rumen-protected choline during thetransition period (hartwell et al., 2000; piepenbrink andoverton, 2003; pinotti et al., 2003; scheer et al., 2002),suggesting that the metabolic changes in hepatic fatty acidmetabolism translated into improved performance duringearly lactation. after cessation of milking, is important for maintaining the health and productivity of transition cows (dann et al., 2006). curtis et al. also, the milk produced could have reduced fat. validate with penn state. most of what is suggested to optimize future fertility is related to relationships between metabolic disorders and risk for delayed conception. the key concept is to strive to meet the requirements of cows for energy and all other nutrients but to not allow cows to exceed their requirements for energy by consuming large amounts for the duration of the dry period. our research group is extremely interested in the potential of these approaches to decrease calving-related health problems. post-calving the ideal window for herd monitoring for neb is in the days 15-50 in milk, post calving the thresholds are different and nefa >0.7mmol/l and bhb >1.4mmol/l are indicative of neb. aim for a body condition score between 2.75 and 3.2. alternatively, differences in peak occurrence for subclinical ketosis may reflect differences in etiology, with early lactation occurrence reflecting suboptimal dry cow management and expression of fatty liver, while later occurrences may indicate deficiencies in lactating cow management (cook et al, 2001). when consumed at a typical consumption level by dry cows (1.8 to 2.0% of body weight; butler et al, 2011), some grass silages will provide an insufficient amount of energy for pregnant dry cows and some will provide too much energy. management systems must recognize this basic phenomenon, and not try to circumvent the genetically programmed metabolic patterns during the lactation cycle. recent studies show that inflamma-tory immune genes are up-regulated in cows sufferingsevere neb (wathes et al., 2009), whereas genes involvedin the acquired immune responses are down-regulatedin neb cows (moyes et al., 2010) highlighting the keyrole of immune responses in transition cows. in that experiment, researchers prevented the normal drop in dmi by force-feeding the refusals into one group of cows fitted with ruminal cannulas. considering the mg deficit of a cow exhibiting hypomagnesaemic tetany, it is usually estimated that the immediate intravenous administration of 1.5 to 2.25 g of mg is required to normalise blood mg concentration (goff 2004). clinical ketosis increased the risk of culling both early in lactation and late in lactation (grohn et al, 1998). (1999) fed close-up diets with energy densities of 5.4, 6.1, and 6.7 mj/kg to cows during the last 28 d before calving. other practices that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with older cows. even the best formulated rations will not be effective if they are not well implemented. whatever the strategy, it is important to consider what preventative measures if any are in place. the requirement for protein (pdi) in the last three months of the pregnancy for dry cows is approximately 475, 535 and 605g/d for a 600kg cow (o’mara, 1996; wolter and ponter, 2012). transfer cows from the fresh cow group, to group 1 after approximately 7 dim, when the intake, production and health are satisfactory. (1999) evaluated the capacity of gluconeogenesis by livers of fat and normal cows at calving. grouping strategy and group feeding behavior influence cow productivity and profitability. however, there is no doubt that hormonal and other physiological factors have the most important impact on this phenomenon. while neb is a physiologically normal process, excessive neb reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects after calving. these coordinated changes in metabolism permit the cow to respond to the accrued nutrient demands for milk synthesis. hypocalcemia impacts a large proportion of cows post-partum.15-36 in a study including 55 dairy herds across the united states, herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence, and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service.6 with such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds, these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a herd level. as the acid accumulation continues more severe problems can occur with dmi and production as well as with overall health (schultz et al., 1993). nutritional considerations for close-up cows there are several areas of critical importance for nutritional management of dairy cows during the close-up period [i.e. there was a 5% relative increase in the odds of rp for each 0.1 mmol/l increase in cholesterol or fas concentration in the week before parturition. ranges of 20 to 40% subclinical hypocalcemia have been reported. when sampled in the appropriate time frame, pre- and post-partum nefa and bhb concentra¬ tion above certain thresholds are associated with negative downstream outcomes such as increased risk of disease, and decreased milking and reproductive performance at the individual cow level. feed restriction can reduce number of daily meals by 50%, but when feed is offered for ad libitum consumption, with consistent time of feeding, access can be limited to 8 h daily with no adverse effects on performance of midlactation cows. the rapidly increasing demands of the fetus and the development of the mammary glands, including the initiation of synthesis of milk components, are causing these changes. negative energy balance, fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome, clinical ketosis, and abomasal displacement. the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage, supplemented with vitamins and minerals. the recognition of the impor-tance of the period from late pregnancy until the adaptationphase of early lactation has led to the development ofthe concept of the transition period, which is commonlydefined as the period from 3 weeks before to 3 weeksafter calving (drackley, 1999). feeding a high nonfirbrous carbohydrate diet prepartum increased dry matter and energy intake, which improved energy balance of cows throughout the transition period. relapses are common, and cows should receive further treatment within 12 hours. immediately after calving, cows experience large changes in nutrient demands and many metabolic adaptations occur to maintain homeorhesis.1 of foremost interest are the adaptive mechanisms to maintain calcium and energy homeostasis. key areas of management to optimize post-partum health, production, and reproduction dairy herds vary widely in the degree to which they achieve success in maintaining excellent health, both in terms of clinical and subclinical health disorders, high milk yield during early lactation, and return to estrous cycling with high fertility in the post-partum period. inflamma-tion and dysregulated immune responses have beenproposed as the missing link in the pathobiolologyof metabolic disorders in transition cows. of all of the grouping/facility factors that have been evaluated in the context of transition cow management, stocking density of groups during the prepartum period has received the most attention.8 29 most of the current recommendations (e.g., optimal stocking density at 80% of headlocks or 30 in (0.8 m] of bunk space per cow8] are based largely on observational work rather than randomized trials in which the benefits of decreased stocking density were observed in primiparous cows only. use of a prepartum “vfa load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered vfa concentrations and ph in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (andersen et al., 1999) and did not positively affect dmi or milk production postpartum (ingvartsen et al., 2001). however, when the quantity and/or the speed of mobilization are exaggerated, the incidence of metabolic problems increase significantly. detailed recommendations for nutrition during the dry period can be found elsewhere (oetzel, 1998). a pooled summary of the two canadian projects showed that monensin crc reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by 40% each. fats in the diet are incorporated into lipoproteins in the intestine and absorbed into the circulation. however, the aspects associated with the improved management of a group of close-up cows may be more important than the particular diet that is fed. overfeeding high-starch rations (high in corn silage and grains) during the entire dry period is detrimental to cow performance and metabolic responses. these proceedings will discuss the di¬ agnostic tools available to bovine practitioners for individual animal calcium concentration determination and herd-level monitoring, as well as current developments in the epidemiology of hypocalcemia and its prevention. 2.0) concentrate supplementation may be required for dry cows. complete oxidation ofnefa generates the metabolite acetyl coenzyme a thatcan be used to generate energy via the krebs cycle. during the closeup period (3 wk before parturition), cows that previously had overconsumed energy during the far-off dry period had greater nefa concentrations (323 vs. 230 µmol/l) than cows previously fed to meet energy requirements. thus postpartum inflammation exacer-bates negative energy status (trevisi et al., 2007, 2010)while carbohydrate insufficiency increases production ofnon-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and ketone bodies in theliver (duffield and herdt, 2000; drackley et al., 2001). it is logical that other disorders can also increase the risk of da. now, we cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time, but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through proper management. ensuring maximal immune system function is essential for expulsion of the placenta after calving, uterine involution, and appropriate efficacy of bacterial defense mechanisms to prevent mastitis. a significant decrease in nefa, bhba and glucose was noted in the precalving period. therefore, the clinical signs will not disappear until the csf mg concentration increases, usually about 1 hour after the iv administration of mg because the blood-brain barrier decreases the diffusion of mg. during this time, it is important not to stimulate the animals to rise in order to avoid the initiation of a tetany episode. allowing for a large population of cellulolytic bacteria and a low population of amylolytic bacteria. increasing the energy density of the prepartum diet with grains equivocally affects the risk of da. however, feeding cows four times a day can be logistically complex in a farm setting, and the recommendation is to deliver fresh feed at least two times a day, ideally three, for this group of animals. 2, managing the challenges in transition dairy cows

abstract the transition from late gestation to lactation is a period of many physiological changes, and a critical time to ensure cows are well prepared for a profitable and healthy lactation. once deposited, the fat accumulated in the liver will remain there until the end of the neb (grummer, 1993). in order to accurately identify cows with hyperketonemia, incidence testing should be performed. da is a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation dairy cows. the activity of liver enzymes indicated that gluconeogenic capacity of the fat cows was impaired. most in the dairy industry believe that there are tremendous opportunities to improve transition cow health and reproductive performance without compromising milk production, yet the solution is not clearly evident. additionally, the type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (whelan et al, 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein and fat. conclusionsproduction diseases of the transition dairy cow whichcause economic losses are underpinned by inflammatoryimmune responses. however, for thin cows, supplementing concentrates in the final three weeks pre-calving reduced the culling rate at 60- days post-calving (agrisearch, 2010). within three weeks of the onset of lactation, milkyield, milk proteins, fat and lactose increase rapidly andexceed feed intake (bertoni et al., 2009). an increase in dietary gluco-genic nutrients (27% starch) in grass and corn silage-baseddiets fed through 9 wk postpartum improved energy sta-tus assessed by calculated energy balance, plasma nefaand bhba concentrations, and liver triglyceride content,but did not affect dmi or milk yield (van knegsel et al.,2007). further-more, ketotic cows are immunosuppressed during thepostpartum period. the systemic levels of immune moleculessuch as haptoglobin (hp) and interleukin 8 (il8) are sig-nificantly elevated around calving (bionaz et al., 2007;bertoni et al., 2008; huzzey et al., 2009). the positive effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis, which might have positive effects on postpartum fertility. this study was only conducted on 24 cows within one herd. feeding these isomers in a rumen-protected form to transition dairy cows reduces negativeenergy balance and nefa and bhb levels in blood (mattoset al., 2000; castaneda-gutierrez et al., 2007; trevisi andbertoni, 2008; esposito et al., 2013). the early postpar-tum period is considered to be the major risk period,because hypocalcemia, metritis, negative energy balanceand nutritional factors play a central role in the patho-genesis of lda (shaver, 1997). the typical decrease in dmi before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and nel by about 2 percentage units and 0.84 mj/kg of dm, respectively, in the pre-calving diet. limiting dietary starchcontent and starch fermentability may increase dmi inearly lactation since there is less rapid production andabsorption of propionate (allen et al., 2009). delivering a consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced abomasum prevention. although each of these ideas by themselves were sound and based on good research data, the ability of higher-energy close-up or “steamup” diets to minimize production diseases in research trials and field experience has been disappointing and frustrating. therefore to pre-vent ketosis and fatty liver syndrome it is necessary to avoidexcessive weight loss in the peripartal period. physiological and pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis, displaced abomasum, and retained placenta (duffield et al., 2002), and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (dohoo and martin, 1984; kremer et al., 1993). thus, in cases of sara, these mech-anisms cannot prevent a transient fall of ruminal ph to
anges below ph 5.5, a level at which rumen function islowered. in several studies, oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis, as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder, such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (mcart and others 2011, mcart and others 2012a, tatone and others 2016a, gordon and others 2017). the iv administration of solutions containing only mg is discouraged as it increases the risk of respiratory and cardiac failure, which is reduced by the addition of ca to the intravenous solutions (goff 2009). postpartummilk production and the requisite nutritional adaptationsinduce a physiological state of negative energy balance(neb). this approach was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving, decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver, and control blood calcium concentrations. systems being implemented include high-straw, one-group total-mixed rations (tmr) for the entire dry period; lower inclusion rates of straw with other forages in one- or two-group systems; use of high-fiber by-product feeds to lower starch content; and a variety of other combinations and modifications. these different cows will react differently to supplemental fat (or other nutrients). serum nefa and bhba concentrations during week 1 were associated with the subsequent occurrence of clinical ketosis. nutrient requirements ofthe fetus reach maximal levels three weeks prepartum,yet dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by 10–30% (bell,1995). this is because the liver has a very limited ability to produce vldl due to a limited capacity to produce a key component (apoprotein b) (marcos et al., 1990; grummer, 1995). generally studies that measured rates with less sensitive milk tests report much lower prevalences than those using serum or urine. generally, this analysis suggests that the prevention of one problem can decrease the incidence of others from developing. bcs is a subjective task and is an area where a valuable service can be provided by the attending vet practice, whether by vet or technician. many thresholds used for subclinical hypocalcemia and ketosis are based on reference values where the limit is set at above or below a 95% confidence interval. as a result, the magnitude of metabolic challenge faced by modern dairy cows at parturition is staggering. the transition period is roughly defined as three weeks prior to calving until three weeks after calving. no treatment effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake, body weight, and body condition score were observed. garnsworthy and co-workers (2009)demonstrated that pregnancy rate was improved whena glucogenic diet that stimulated plasma insulin was fedbefore the first ovulation postpartum followed by a lipid-rich diet that lowered plasma insulin during the breedingperiod. identification of an objective level where nefa and/or bhb are excessive and cause detrimental effects on health, reproduction and milk production, has been difficult due to individual animal variations, normal metabolite elevations during the transition period, and the multiple herd level factors that can affect the outcomes of interest. grass dry matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg dm depending on the time of year. to our knowledge, no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and production outcomes. it is possible that higher milk yields put cows at increased risk of developing subclinical ketosis. at parturition, cows were assigned to a postpartum total mixed ration that contained either cracked corn or steam-flaked corn. earlier holtenius et al. if 15% or fewer of the animals sampled (3 to 14 dim) have a bhb concentration > 1.2 mmol/l, the recommendation is to sample again every other week to monitor herd-level prevalence of elevated bhb. regardless of the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia, the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of clinical ketosis. few disease associations with subclinical hypocalcemia have been reported. often, addition of water or another wet ingredient to decrease the ration dry matter into the 46 to 48% range is also required for optimal effectiveness of these rations. energy during the transition period; therefore, has a major impact on cow performance and longevity. nutritional management of dry cows traditionally, nutritional management of dairy cows during the far off dry period [i.e. a severe neb in the transition period can aid in the development of metabolic diseases, prolong the interval between calving and first ovulation and decrease fertility. it is difficult to compare these numbers across studies since numerous factors beyond cow and herd level risk influence the rates. procedures—serum concentrations of fatty acids (fas), β-hydroxybutyrate, cholesterol, glucose, urea, and calcium and blood leukocyte, neutrophil, lymphocyte, monocyte, and eosinophil counts were determined. inverted milk curves in hyperketonemic cows were noted in a large swedish study (gustafsson et al, 1993). our research group has been interested in the potential use of supplemental fat during the dry period to restore body condition to thin cows and as a possible metabolism modifier. whereas the dry period in cows may be considered tobe a resting phase between lactations, in reality consider-able fetal growth, mammary tissue remodeling and highnutritional demands occur. for the purposes of this article, the entirety of the dry period and the last few weeks of lactation are included as part of the discussion of feeding and managing the transition cow for disease prevention. treatment options for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose, oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol, and ancillary treatments such as administration of b-vitamins, choline, and glucocorticoids. cows showing clinical signs of the disease or having concentrations of bhb exceeding 3.0 mmol/l likely benefit from intravenous glucose administration. cows (n = 1142) were randomly assigned to receive either a single subcutaneous injection of 3000 iu of vitamin e, or placebo, 1 wk before expected calving. a dose of propylene glycol of 1l per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased bhba, and nefa and increased glucose concentrations (studer et al, 1993). field studies have shown that subclinical ketosis often affects 40% of cows in a herd although the incidence can be as high as 80%. role of feed additives in addition to good nutrition, certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when administered prophylactically. high producing cows postpartum will react differently to supplemental nutrients in the pre- and postpartum periods from lower producing cows as their needs, metabolic processes, and dmi differ from one another. treating sck cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put in place. the transition period for a dairy cow is from 3 to 2 wk prepartum until 2 to 3 wk postpartum. impact on milk production and milk components in general there is consensus that a negative association between hyperketonemia and milk production exists, however there are conflicting reports. the gluconeogenic potential of monensin has attracted researchers to investigate its possible role as an antiketogenic agent in dairy cattle. these include macromineral nutrition, energy nutrition, and protein and amino acid nutrition. complete oxidation of nefa generates metabolites (acetyl coenzyme a) that can be used to generate energy via the krebs cycle. abomasal displacement is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult dairy cows. to maintain calcium concentrations at a level required for life (e.g., thermoregulation, muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum, cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone, decreases calcium excretion by the kidney, and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of calcium. the reduction of overconditioning cows in late lactation and the early dry period, as well as lead feeding with concentrates about three weeks prior to calving have also been suggested as aids in prophylaxis (andersson, 1988). in this case, care must be taken to ensure that cows end up with an appropriate bcs of 3.0 to 3.25 at calving (roche, et al., 2009). if dmi is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference, metabolic problems may get worse rather than better. metritismetritis (puerperal metritis) has been defined as aninflammation of the uterus resulting in systemic signs ofsickness, including fever, red-brown watery foul-smellingenlarged uterus with a watery or purulent discharge, dull-ness, inappetance, elevated heart rate, and low productionin the first 7 days after calving (sheldon et al., 2006a).there may be predisposing factors such as retained pla-centas, fetal maceration, or difficult calving (földi et al.,2006; sheldon et al., 2006a,b; chapwanya, 2008). if dried off early (eg. cows with concentrations of bhba at or above1400 µmol/l in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement (duffield, 1997). cytokines play akey role in stimulating systemic inflammatory responses,including increased body temperature and heart rate, anddecreased feed intake (dantzer and kelley, 2007). herds with more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of nefas and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events, poorer reproduction, and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative energy balance. the endocrine and metabolic adaptation through the transition period is known to affect the innate immune system's response to infection by reducing the ability to appropriately activate neutrophils and other immune cell types. duffield et al (1998b) reported that monensin crc administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence, prevalence, and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd field study. 