Literature linking the effects of prepartum nutrition and subsequent fertility is scarce. Most of what is suggested to optimize future fertility is related to relationships between metabolic disorders and risk for delayed conception. Common metabolic problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes, milk fever, ketosis, and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of ovarian cycles. Manipulation of the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (Hayirli et al., 2002) and postpartum lactational performance. Cows fed high fermentable energy diets prepartum have improved energy balance, reduced concentrations of plasma nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate, and reduced triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue. Hepatic lipidosis early postpartum has been linked with an extension in the postpartum anovulatory period (Reist et al., 2000) and reduced reproductive performance in lactating dairy cows (Jorritsma et al., 2000). It is difficult to determine whether the negative effect of triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue on postpartum resumption of ovarian cycles is direct, or just a consequence of negative energy balance. Nevertheless, diets that minimize the risk for hepatic lipidosis and ketosis are expected to improve postpartum energy balance and resumption of cyclicity. Minor et al. (1998) fed 50 multiparous and 25 primigravid Holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 d postpartum. Treatments were applied during the first 40 weeks of lactation. Feeding a high nonfirbrous carbohydrate diet prepartum increased dry matter and energy intake, which improved energy balance of cows throughout the transition period. Plasma glucose concentrations tended to be higher, and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet. Because of the positive effects on lipid metabolism, diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates increased concentrations of liver glycogen and reduced concentrations of hepatic triacylglycerol. The positive effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis, which might have positive effects on postpartum fertility. Although diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates improve energy status of transition cows, provision of adequate amounts of physically effective NDF is important to maintain rumen fill, thereby helping in the prevention of displacement of abomasum. Cows that develop displacement of abomasum have delayed postpartum insemination (Raizman and Santos, 2002), which might decrease reproductive efficiency. Diets with a net energy for lactation greater than 1.65 Mcal/kg were associated with increased risk for displacement of abomasum (Cameron et al., 1999). Little scientific information is available for the fiber requirements of dry cows to maintain adequate rumen health and minimize the incidence of displacement of abomasum. Mertens (1997) created a system to determine the effectiveness of NDF to stimulate rumination and to maintain milk fat concentrations. According to his data, fiber sources are classified according to their ability to stimulate rumination, which was directly related to the size of particle and suggested that lactating Holstein cows should receive diets containing at least 21% physically effective NDF in order to maintain milk fat content above 3.5%. Most prepartum diets contain between 30 to 40% NDF and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the specific herd. In farms with aggressive fresh cow programs, incidence of displacement of abomasum is below 2% of the total cows calving per year, and these herds can feed prepartum diets with less than 35% NDF, therefore higher energy diets. As I mentioned in one of my previous articles (Barragan 2020a), the transition period is one of, if not the, most challenging period for dairy cows during their production cycle. During this time, cows experience four main physiological challenges: a drop in dry matter intake, an increase in nutrient demands, immunosuppression, and systemic stress and inflammation (especially around calving). Therefore, the best approach to manage this group of animals is by addressing these challenges. If we think about the drop in intake and the increase in nutrient needs, the main negative effects are animals going into a negative energy balance (because they are using more nutrients than what they are consuming) and developing metabolic diseases such as ketosis and fatty liver. Now, we cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time, but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through proper management. Although cows will experience some degree of immunosuppression during this time regardless of management, an exacerbated stressful and/or inflammatory response may magnify this immunosuppression, increasing the risk of cows developing diseases. The losses for dairy cows associated with diseases are well known, but on top of affecting the welfare of cows and economics of the farm, these conditions have a long-term effect on the productivity and fertility of cows, decreasing milk production and conception rates, and increasing culling of animals. By modulating stress and inflammation after calving, the risks of developing diseases and poor performance may be decreased.
The management practices for transition cows must be focused on maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation. To maximize dry matter intake, diet composition — especially fiber and energy concentrations —is one of the most critical factors. Dr. Robert Van Saun clearly explained in our previous articles some of the key aspects for formulating transition cow diets (Van Saun, 2020). Although diet composition is important, I would argue that what we do with that diet is equally important. We could have the best formulated diet with the best ingredients, but if cows do not have access to it, the diet composition would be irrelevant. During this period, cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day, and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between feed deliveries. There are two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed delivery frequency. It is recommended to push feed up every two to four hours, with more frequent push ups (every 30 minutes) during the first two hours after fresh feed is delivered. With regard to feed delivery frequency, research has shown that when performed often, up to four times a day, this practice will stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat. However, feeding cows four times a day can be logistically complex in a farm setting, and the recommendation is to deliver fresh feed at least two times a day, ideally three, for this group of animals. Now, none of the practices above will work if cows are not offered a spot at the dining table, which leads to an important factor: proper stocking density. Although this is a broad topic, I will try to summarize it in a few sentences. There are two ways to measure stocking density; one of them is based on the lying surface, or stalls, and the other one is based on the feed bunk space. The safest way to assess this, to guarantee feed availability, is to use the feed bunk space method. By measuring the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen, the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can be estimated. Ideally, 30 inches of feed bunk space is required per cow in the pen, which will be equivalent to having a stocking density of 80%-85% based on number of stalls in the pen. Other practices that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with older cows. Many of the practices described above may modulate stress and inflammation to some degree; however, there are specific practices around calving that may have a greater effect. In one of our studies, we found that cows that experienced a difficult calving had an elevated inflammatory response in the days after calving, and subsequently, a higher risk of developing diseases compared to cows that experienced a normal calving. Therefore, timely identification and proper assistance of cows experiencing a difficult calving is critical to decrease inflammation and stress during this time. As I have mentioned in many of my previous articles (Barragan, 2020b), personnel training is the very first, and perhaps the most important, step to achieve this. In the same study, we found that cows that experienced dystocia and were treated with a mild anti-inflammatory drug produced almost 10 pounds per day more milk during the first 30 days after calving compared to cows that experienced dystocia but were not treated (Barragan et al., 2020a). Similarly, multiparous cows, regardless of calving difficulty, that were treated with this anti-inflammatory drug had lower systemic inflammation and produced almost 4 pounds per day more milk during the first 60 days in milk compared to cows that were not treated (Barragan et al., 2020c). In a more recent study, we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases, such as metritis, and also improved fertility (Barragan et al., 2021). Therefore, there may be an advantage to modulating inflammation after calving. If you noted, I said “modulating” and not “decreasing.” The reason behind this is that cows need the stress and inflammatory responses for natural processes such as parturition initiation and expulsion of the placenta. In a study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving, treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves, postpartum fever, retained placenta, metritis and decreased milk production. (Newby et al., 2017) Management of transition cows is one of the most important aspects of farm management that will set up dairy cows for success during the lactation period. The main goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation. Excellent diet formulation and feed bunk management are critical for decreasing the drop in dry matter intake; however, if cows do not have access to the diet, these practices will be meaningless. Calving monitoring and proper assistance, along with mild anti-inflammatory treatment, can be beneficial to modulate stress and inflammation after calving and decrease the losses associated with this period. At Drying Off, Selecting cows to dry off early or cull.Perform milk production planning. Dry off or cull cows that are lame, have high SCC or that are disease carriers (e.g.: leukosis) Confirm pregnancy before drying off. Aim for a body condition score between 2.75 and 3.2. Limit protein and energy intake Provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and withdraw concentrates. Provide an adequate mineral supply. Relocate the cow
Maintain water access. Use abrupt dry off for cows producing 15 kg of milk/day or less. Use intermittent milking if all of the other options fail to decrease milk production to 15 kg/day or less.  Limit intermittent milking to 2-3 days. Consider using a teat sealant.  The use of a teat sealant is strongly recommended when there will be a long dry period. Consult your veterinarian about adjusting the vaccination protocol if the cows are vaccinated at drying off.
Verify the Dry Off & Fresh Monitoring report. If there are a lot of fresh cows with high SCC, discuss dry cow management with your veterinarian because infections observed during the first 50 days of lactation have often been acquired during the dry period. Minimize stress, avoid overcrowding, provide a clean, dry and well ventilated environment. Ensure that there is adequate ventilation to minimize heat stress. Provide a minimum of 30 in. /head of space at the feed bunk.  For example, a round hay feeder with an 8-foot diameter and 18 sections will allow 15 cows to eat at the same time.
Control flies and parasites. Provide fresh water and clean waterers. Body condition score should ideally be maintained between 2.75 and 3.25. Monitor body condition once a month.
Prepare cows 25 days before calving and heifers 32 days before calving.
The average duration of a pregnancy is 280 days (Valacta, 2020).  Validate the pregnancy duration used by your software.
Group cow relocations to only take place once a week.
Relocate cows at least 21 days before their predicted calving date or right before labour begins.
Ensure that the alleys are not slippery when moving cows.
Evaluate the option of using the Rumensin bolus with your veterinarian.
Clip and wash the udder before calving. Use a specific ration for fresh cows if possible. Provide access to the ration 23 hours out of 24. Avoid ration sorting.  Validate with Penn State. Provide comparable feeds in the close-up ration and the fresh cow/early lactation ration
With conventional feeding, increase concentrates by around 350 g per day.
Transfer cows from the fresh cow group, to group 1 after approximately 7 DIM, when the intake, production and health are satisfactory. The transition period is roughly defined as three weeks prior to calving until three weeks after calving. This period is aptly named. Major metabolic transitions occur in a cow’s body as she converts from a non-lactating to a lactating state and undergoes the stress of parturition. Management transitions such as pen moves and ration changes are additionally occurring. Cows often fail to adapt to these metabolic and management changes, resulting in 75% of dairy cow disease incidence during the first month after calving and substantial economic losses to the dairy industry (LeBlanc et al., 2006). Not surprisingly, considerable research is being conducted to better understand transition cow physiology and to develop improved techniques for transition cow management. This review will begin with a discussion of the drop in intake during the transition period and how that drop relates to cow health. Next, three transition cow management strategies will be addressed: 1) supplementing monensin, 2) shortening dry periods, and 3) manipulating prepartum photoperiod. Each of these areas has received substantial attention in the past several years and each offers new tools to dairy producers managing cows during this difficult time. Finally, this review will conclude with a summary of transition cow management goals. The transition period is commonly accepted as the period from three weeks pre to three weeks post calving. However, the entire dry period is important and indeed the first 60 days after calving is also a critical window. Regardless of the system, whether a seasonal lower yielding system or a year round higher output system, the principles of transition cow management are the same. Periparturient diseases such as milk fever, ketosis, and displaced abomasums can all be associated with poor transition (see Table 1). The immense negative consequences on the metabolism of the early lactation cow due to failure of the transition period are great. One of the major negative impacts of poor transition cow management is immunosuppression. Poor transition cow management can impact all of the pillars of a successful lactation such as reduced productivity, fertility outcomes or health of the cow. Having cows in the correct body conditioning score (BCS) at all stages of the lactation cycle should always be a priority. The most important aspect of dry cow nutrition is to ensure the correct calving BCS. Thus, if BCS corrections are required in late lactation or at dry off, a nutritional strategy should be put in place to ensure an appropriate energy allowance is offered. The recommended BCS for dairy cows at each point of the lactation cycle is depicted in Table 2. The target body condition score at calving is 3.0-3.25. BCS is a subjective task and is an area where a valuable service can be provided by the attending vet practice, whether by vet or technician. The group of cows that calve from March on are most at risk of over-conditioning as this group often have a prolonged dry period. It has been proven that when dairy cows calve down in an over-conditioned state (BCS 4.0, scale 1-5) they have a higher level of BCS loss post-calving, a compromised metabolic state, and a reduced feed intake in early-lactation in comparison to cows with an appropriate BCS at calving (BCS 3.25, scale 1-5) at calving (Alibrahim et al, 2010). Dry cows (600kg) require 6.4, 7.1 and 8.1UFL per day when housed three months prior to, two months prior to and in the last month prior to calving, respectively.These requirements assume that cows are dried off with BCS on target (see Table 2). Grass silages are extremely variable in their major nutritional qualities. A very comprehensive study of pit silages carried out in Northern Ireland (Steen et al, 1998) reported huge variation in grass silage quality. When consumed at a typical consumption level by dry cows (1.8 to 2.0% of body weight; Butler et al, 2011), some grass silages will provide an insufficient amount of energy for pregnant dry cows and some will provide too much energy. If grass silage quality is poor, cows may lose BCS in the dry period. Furthermore, in years of low milk price and or poor grazing conditions in the autumn, cows may dry-off with a low BCS. In this case, care must be taken to ensure that cows end up with an appropriate BCS of 3.0 to 3.25 at calving (Roche, et al., 2009). Thin cows have been proven to have a significantly increased risk of lameness, uterine health issues and retained foetal membranes. If the low BCS persists to the breeding season, low fertility performance will result (Buckley et al, 2003). If the herd is thin in late lactation (eg. 50% of cows at BCS 2.5 and less), the option exists to dry off cows early, especially in years of low milk price. If dried off early (eg. A 14-week dry period), cows fed average quality grass silage (68 DMD) should have an increase in BCS of approximately 0.5 units before calving. If the low BCS is only noticed at dry off, eight weeks pre-calving, ad libitum good-quality or very good-quality grass silage is enough to increase BCS by 0.5 units (grass silage quality 72 DMD and above). With lowquality grass silage or where BCS is very low at dry off (eg. 2.0) concentrate supplementation may be required for dry cows. There are many theories on why non-structural carbohydrate should be fed to late pregnant dry cows such as developing rumen papillae, acclimatizing rumen microbes and avoiding fatty liver. It is also interesting to note that NRC (2001) advocate a 70% increase in energy density in the close-up dry cow diet. There is not a lot of research evaluating the requirement for these strategies in grass silage-fed dry cows going to grass post-calving. However, data from Burke et al (2010) for New Zealand dairy cows indicates that feeding nonfibrous carbohydrate in the late pregnant dairy cow diet had no effect on reproduction in grazing dairy cows. In Irish data, McNamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four weeks pre-calving. It is interesting that a large on-farm study recently completed in Northern Ireland did not find any benefit on milk production, fertility or culling as a result of supplementing concentrates for the final three weeks pre-calving for cows with BCS in the desired range. However, for thin cows, supplementing concentrates in the final three weeks pre-calving reduced the culling rate at 60- days post-calving (AgriSearch, 2010). Thus, the requirement for concentrate in the dry cow diet of most Irish cows (ca 5,000L of milk, 400kg F and P) should be driven primarily by concerns about BCS and silage quality. The requirement for the development of rumen papillae and to acclimatise rumen microbes for dry cows coming off a grass silage-based diet and receiving 4kg or less of concentrate feed in a grazing scenario, is unlikely to be significant, if BCS is on target. For cows that will be fed 8kg of concentrate or more in early lactation, a conservative approach in keeping with the normal digestive physiology of the cow would be to feed 1kg of starch in the last woweeks pre-calving. This could be 2kg of a dry cow nut, 2kg of barley or 3kg of maize silage or whole crop-wheat silage. This concentrate (starch) feeding at this time may be of increased importance for thin cows. The requirement for protein (PDI) in the last three months of the pregnancy for dry cows is approximately 475, 535 and 605g/d for a 600kg cow (O’Mara, 1996; Wolter and Ponter, 2012). In most cases, with grass silage only diets this amount of PDI will be supplied. However, difficulty arises if either the PDIN or the PDIE value of grass silage is less than 60g/kg of DM. Difficulties with PDI provision will also arise where straw or low protein forages might be included in the diet of the dry cow. It is important that silage is analysed to determine the need for supplementary protein. Although other feeding standards organisations (NRC, 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the PDI allowances, research work carried out in Ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage based diets. However, for diets based on grass silage and straw fed in restricted amounts, improvements in milk protein concentration were noted in early lactation following supplementary protein feeding in the dry period (Murphy, 1999). Thus, PDI balances should be calculated based on the farm specific forage(s) used in the dry cow diet, it is likely that supplementary protein may be required for dry cow diets containing straw, low-protein forages such as maize silage or low PDI grass silages. The early lactation cow is not to be forgotten and the start of lactation is a key time when we must ensure positive metabolic status to ensure optimal health and productivity and later, fertility is achieved. Grass dry matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg DM depending on the time of year. Good grazing management is necessary to have an idea what the grass availability is and what is actually being eaten in order that the correct supplementation level is offered. Additionally, the type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (Whelan et al, 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein and fat. As many cows will be managed indoors for the immediate early lactation period it is essential, regardless of how big or small the farm, that the early lactation cow diet is calculated to meet energy requirement for the appropriate level of production. There are a huge number of factors that determine energy allowance for example feed space, weather, grazing conditions, and silage qualities are all important. Whatever strategy is used to feed the early lactation cow, some consideration should be given to determine if nutrient supply is meeting nutrient demands at this crucial time in the production cycle. Therefore, grass and concentrate allowances should also be compared to the cows energy requirement using the UFL system. Major minerals, trace elements and vitamins are also important and the dry cow diet should include a specific dry cow mineral. Ideally, farm minerals are based on forage analysis and are selected based on what is complementary for the individual farm. Although not common, the UCD Herd Health Group have encountered problems where occasionally some farms may feed the same mineral to milking and dry cows inadvertently or push the milking cow total mixed ration (TMR) in to dry cows, this is important to look at, as the level of calcium for example will be entirely different and can be very dangerous with regard to milk fever control. Milk fever is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by some farms. Calcium homeostasis has a key role in the health of the cow at calving, clinical (the tip of the iceberg effect) and subclinical hypocalcaemia have a major detrimental effect on the early lactation cow in terms of health and production. It is not uncommon when questioned about the control strategy used on farms to prevent hypocalcaemia that there is none. Subclinical hypocalcaemia is linked to immune system competence. Roche (2003) demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from subclinical hypocalcaemia. In order to test for hypocalcaemia, the timing of the sample is important as it needs to be taken within 24 hours of calving making decent sample sizes difficult (10-12 cows/10% of the group). The first key area, already addressed, in the control of milk fever is the control of body condition score, maintaining BCS in the desired range at calving is a fundamental point in preventing milk fever. Magnesium supplementation is also important; 20-25g of supplemental magnesium is often required in silage-based dry cow diets. Magnesium plays a key role in the calcium homeostasis of the cow. Another fundamental player in milk fever prevention is potassium. High potassium, as is found in many grass silages, is implicated in the dietary cation anion difference (DCAD) or in simple terms high potassium induces a state of metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate in hypocalcaemia. Additionally, potassium is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in calcium regulation. Thus, it is vital that the level of potassium in the dry cow diet is understood – which requires mineral analysis of forages. In herds where potassium in the forage exceeds 2.5% of dry matter, a separate milk fever control strategy should be in place. Similarly, grass based dry cow diets are difficult to control mineral intake and therefore can be problematic with regards to milk fever control thus such herds with problems should consider ideally having cows three weeks indoors on a controlled ration pre-calving even if grass is utilised in the far off dry period. The role of minerals in the diet contributing to DCAD can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full DCAD strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms, for this to work the DCAD value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time of calving. Partial DCAD is another option for control of milk fever if implemented correctly. Whatever the strategy, it is important to consider what preventative measures if any are in place. The feeding environment is not to be underestimated in the role in the success of the transition period. Feed space is a huge issue and should be accurately measured in any dry cow accommodation. Feed space requirement depends on the weight of the cow and the amount of competition for food, estimates of minimal requirements of 0.6m per cow for a dry cow of 600kg BW or 0.8m for a lactating cow. Access to clean water is essential and an adequate area where cows can drink that is sufficient for the size of the dry cow area, fresh drinking water is essential to maximise feed intake. Offering fresh feed daily and not letting feed heat up or go off helps with intakes also. Offering feed in the calving area and close up accommodation is useful in milk fever control ensuring the cow has feed in front of her at all times. Cubicle management and stocking rate is also very important in early lactation. Minimising group changes and stressors such as moving to the home farm on the point of caving is another area for consideration. Mixing of heifers who are often naïve to the adult herd endemic diseases if reared off site is a careful consideration and thus in such cases mixing of heifers well before calving or managing as a separate group until after calving could be considered. It is essential that if we seriously want to assess transition that we assess all areas within our remit so any potential pitfalls can be identified. Walking the farm, measuring feed space, looking at the cows, body condition scoring is very important. We can also monitor some key areas with additional testing. Some recognised targets for disease incidence are included in Table 1. Other key areas for monitoring include monitoring of markers of energy balance – it is advised to measure a cohort at least 10-12 or 10% of large groups of dry cows between five to 15 days pre-calving for NEFA where >0.4mmol/l and BHB where > 0.7mmol/l is indicative of a problem with NEB. Post-calving the ideal window for herd monitoring for NEB is in the days 15-50 in milk, post calving the thresholds are different and NEFA >0.7mmol/l and BHB >1.4mmol/l are indicative of NEB. Milk solids can be used if routine milk recording is practiced to look at low milk protein and high fat:protein ratios in the early lactation group (0-60DIM) as an additional herd screening tool for NEB. No more than 10% of cows 0-60 in milk should have milk fat: protein >1.5 and no more than 10% early lactation cows should have a milk protein <3.05. In order to increase reliability of monitoring a combination of herd monitoring tools should be used to gain an accurate report of individual farm transition cow management. Transition cow management is central to the productivity, fertility, health and welfare of the dairy cow and is an area where meaningful engagement with farmers can have major positive welfare consequences for the cows and adds momentous value to the veterinary services provided for the farmer. Production diseases of the dairy cow are caused by a level of production inconsistent with nutrient intake, provision of an inadequate diet, an unsuitable environment, an inappropriate breeding policy or various combinations of these factors. Although the transition period of 3 weeks pre-calving until 3 weeks post-calving is associated with a peak incidence of production disease, the effects of these diseases on dairy cow health and productivity extend far into the following lactation. Recent advances in understanding of production diseases include the emergence of propylene glycol and rumen protected choline as the supplements of choice for preventing fatty liver and the absence of any preventative effect of increased energy density in the close-up dry period diet on this condition; the linear negative influence of dietary cation anion difference (DCAD) on the incidence of milk fever regardless of urinary pH or the target level of dietary DCAD achieved; the inflammatory response associated with subacute rumen acidosis and its effect on feed intake; an increased awareness of the potential for antioxidant status to improve immunity and health in the transition period; the development of more standardised diagnostic criteria and treatment protocols for uterine infection.
A significant body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine production diseases. One of the important challenges facing the dairy industry is the development, implementation and economic assessment of practical, integrated, blueprints of best practice for prevention of the production diseases and other diseases of the dairy cow. The transition period for a dairy cow is from 3 to 2 wk prepartum until 2 to 3 wk postpartum. The term transition is to underscore the important physiological, metabolic, and nutritional changes occurring in this time frame. It constitutes a turning point in the productive cycle of the cow from one lactation to the next. The manner in which these changes occur and how they are managed are of great importance as they are closely linked to lactation performance, clinical and subclinical postpartum diseases, and reproductive performance that can significantly affect profitability. Transition cow nutrition and management have received much attention in the research and popular-based literature in recent years because of the recognition of its importance in the productivity and health of cows. The problem that our research scientists are facing is their ability to gather enough cows of similar productivity characteristics in one place to conduct the research necessary to help us to understand this animal. Because of this difficulty, we have used animals outside of this short time frame and tried to simulate the same conditions that exist in the true transition cow. This method has given us a deeper understanding of the problems faced by these cows, but has also led to some confusion in interpreting data. Many reports exist citing the metabolic and health problems that occur with increasing productivity (Simianer et al., 1991; Jones et al., 1994; Emanuelson and Oltenacu, 1998) and with the economic losses associated with these (Drackley, 1999). The occurrence of health problems during the transition period is clearly a major complicating factor for subsequent reproductive performance (Ferguson, 2001), resulting in additional economic losses. Poor transitions also result in milk income losses. Every pound of milk lost from peak production represents a loss of 200 lb of milk for the lactation. Poor transition periods often result in the loss of 10 to 20 lb of peak milk (e.g., Wallace et al., 1996), which could represent 2000 to 4000 lb of unrealized milk yield. It is, therefore, pertinent to elaborate nutritional strategies to facilitate the passage of the cow through this transition phase; while minimizing health problems and optimizing productivity/ profitability for the remainder of the ensuing lactation. We will proceed with a review of the biology of the transition cow and the phenomena that mark this period with the goal of developing nutritional strategies. It is now well established that dry matter intake (DMI) decreases as calving approaches. Dry matter intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (BW) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 1.4 % BW in the 7 to 10 d period before calving. This 30 % decrease in DMI appears to occur very rapidly in the transition period. The decrease in prepartum DMI has classically been attributed to the rapid growth of the fetus taking up abdominal space and displacing rumen volume. However, there is no doubt that hormonal and other physiological factors have the most important impact on this phenomenon. A number of profound physiologic changes occur in the transition cow that modifies her metabolism drastically. The rapidly increasing demands of the fetus and the development of the mammary glands, including the initiation of synthesis of milk components, are causing these changes. Bell (1995) estimated that the daily demands for fetal and placental growth in the last 3 wk of gestation are 360 g of metabolizable protein and 3 to 5 Mcal of net energy. The concentration of plasma insulin continually declines in the transition period until calving and that of somatotropin increases rapidly between the end of gestation and the initiation of lactation. Concentration of plasma progesterone, which is high in gestation, rapidly falls at calving and there is a transitory elevation in estrogens and glucocorticoids in the periparturient period. These hormonal changes not only contribute to the decline in DMI, but also coordinate the metabolic changes that favor, if not force, the mobilization of body fat reserves from adipocytes (Grummer, 1995). Resulting from this mobilization of lipids, we observe an increase in concentration of plasma non esterified fatty acids (NEFA), which rise gradually in the prepartum transition period, but rapidly in the last 3 d of gestation. A portion of this increase in NEFA is obligatory and is under hormonal control while another portion is the result of an energy deficit (negative energy balance or NEB) (Bertics et al., 1992; Grummer, 1995; Dyk and Emery, 1996). The magnitude of the NEB prepartum, therefore, appears to be a variable that can be mitigated through nutritional management. Additionally, the NEB and resulting increase in plasma NEFA, if sufficiently high, contributes to the development of fatty liver; which itself is a contributing factor to other health problems in the postpartum period (Grummer, 1995; Dyk and Emery, 1996). It is not unusual for a high producing cow in the first 100 d in milk (DIM) to consume 22 kg of DM/d, of which more than half is in the form of concentrates, without posing any particular problems to the cow if the diet is well balanced. However, this same diet consumed by a fresh cow can cause a severe ruminal acidosis. The major difference in rumen function between these 2 stages of lactation can explain the different responses to the same diet. During the dry period, cows generally consume a diet that is principally composed of forages and, by consequence, is more fibrous than the type of diet offered in lactation. This nuance affects rumen function in 2 ways. First, the rumen flora is adapted to a diet that is low in non-fiber carbohydrates (NFC) during the dry period. allowing for a large population of cellulolytic bacteria and a low population of amylolytic bacteria. As the amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid, their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid (Goff, 1999). If the ration is changed abruptly at calving the capacity of the rumen flora to metabolize lactate, the principal acid responsible for acute rumen acidosis, is at a minimum at the initiation of lactation. The lactate producing bacteria increase in numbers rapidly as the amount of NFC in the diet increases, but the lactate-utilizing bacteria adapt more slowly (3 to 4 wk). Therefore, the risk of lactate accumulation in the rumen is high with abrupt changes from high to low fiber diets. Further, it is a known phenomenon that as DMI increases, rate of passage from the rumen increases as well. After calving, when DMI is relatively low, rate of passage is slow; allowing for greater extent of fermentation and acid accumulation in the rumen. If dietary NFC increases abruptly at calving, with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates, the amount of VFA produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of VFA in the rumen. This situation leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (SARA) and contributes to reduced DMI and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early postpartum period. The conditions described above favor the occurrence of health problems during the transition period. The principal metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: Disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver, ketosis, subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); Disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever, sub-clinical hypocalcemia, udder edema); and Problems related to the immune system (retained placenta, metritis, mastitis). A factor that has not received a lot of specific attention and is superimposed on all of this is the issue of protein requirements. This will be discussed subsequently as well. We will see in the next sections some of the etiology and preventive measures for these problems and the nutritional considerations related to these 3 axes. It is necessary to mention here that these disorders are interrelated and that the conditions conducive to the development of one problem in one category can lead to a disorder in another category. For example, milk fever or subclinical hypocalcemia can lead to loss of muscular tonicity resulting in an increased risk of retained placenta and/or displaced abomasums, in spite of retained placenta being classified as a problem related to the immune system. Curtis et al. (1985) conducted a retrospective analysis of the risk factors associated with metabolic problems. Their analysis revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta, milk fever, and mastitis. Cows having retained placentas were more at risk for developing mastitis and ketosis. Cows with ketosis were 12 times more likely to develop displaced abomasums. Generally, this analysis suggests that the prevention of one problem can decrease the incidence of others from developing. The transition period is marked by major hormonal changes. While these hormones are causing a reduction in DMI there is an increase in nutrient requirements by the cow to support fetal growth, mammogenesis, and lactogenesis (Bell, 1995; Grummer, 1995). This increase in nutrient demand is partially met by the DMI and partially by the mobilization of body tissues. Although the hormonal milieu will drive a certain amount of this body mobilization, excessive body catabolism is undesirable for health, reproduction, and milk production. It is, therefore, essential to pay particularly close attention to the formulation of rations in this transition period, both pre- and post-partum. Few published studies exist on transition period nutrition on a holistic basis. However, we will try to review the literature related to specific nutrients studied in this period of the cow's production cycle. The energetic demands of gestating cows reach 1.3 to 1.5 times the maintenance requirements by the end of gestation (Quigley and Drewry, 1998). The growth of fetal tissues follows an exponential curve beginning in the third trimester of pregnancy (Bell et al., 1995; House and Bell, 1994). For those using the Cornell Net Carbohydrate and Protein System (CNCPS) version 6.1; the fetal, placental, and mammogenesis requirements for nutrients are now more dynamic and added into requirements. During both the prepartum and postpartum transition period cows require more energy than they are able to consume resulting in the NEB and the concomitant loss of body weight (condition) to supply the necessary energy even in healthy cows (Bell, 1995). Grummer (1995) demonstrated that the NEB and body weight loss begins in the prepartum transition period, but that the NEB is greatest in the first week postpartum. However, there is much variation in the magnitude of the NEB after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (Garnsworthy, 1989), the severity of the depression in DMI (Bertics et al., 1992), the quality of the ration, and season. A severe NEB in the transition period can aid in the development of metabolic diseases, prolong the interval between calving and first ovulation and decrease fertility. Butler et al. (1981) showed that first ovulation in cows occurs 10 d after the nadir in NEB. Energy during the transition period; therefore, has a major impact on cow performance and longevity. Severe NEB also can lead to fatty livers and compromised liver function essential in all metabolic functions including detoxification. Glucose is a substance that plays a fundamental role in all living beings. In the last week of fetal development, the fetus uses an estimated 46 % of maternal glucose taken up by the uterus (Bell, 1995). Additionally, a cow producing 30 kg of milk/d uses at least 2 kg of blood glucose to synthesize lactose for milk (Bell, 1996). The end of pregnancy and the beginning of lactation; therefore, represent a time when there is a massive increase in need for glucose. This poses an enormous challenge for the liver that has to synthesize all of this glucose from propionate and amino acids as well as a challenge for other tissues and organs that have to adapt to a reduction of glucose availability. Glucose is an equally important energy source for the ovary and the reduced glucose availability in the beginning of lactation can negatively impact the re-establishment of ovarian activity after calving (Rabiee et al., 1999). The concentration of plasma insulin decreases dramatically as calving approaches and remains low in the first week postpartum. The concentration of plasma somatotropin increases dramatically and rapidly postpartum. This decrease in insulin combined with a decrease in sensitivity of adipose tissue to insulin and the increase in somatotropin results in a decrease in the synthesis of triglycerides in adipose and favors their mobilization (Bell, 1995; Lanna and Bauman, 1999). Therefore, there is a resulting increase in plasma NEFA at calving. The somatotropin, in concert with elevated cortisol, stimulates the liver to produce more glucose. These coordinated changes in metabolism permit the cow to respond to the accrued nutrient demands for milk synthesis. However, due to many factors, including those previously mentioned, the metabolic processes do not adjust sufficiently and a disequilibrated metabolism leads to many of the typical problems associated with transition cows. The mobilization of lipids in the beginning of lactation is a normal and required process to help the cow meet her energy demands for lactation. However, when the quantity and/or the speed of mobilization are exaggerated, the incidence of metabolic problems increase significantly. It is not uncommon to find a ketotic cow also having problems with fatty liver and displaced abomasum. Ruminal acidosis is also a frequent problem for cows at the beginning of lactation, because of highly fermentable rations and insufficient rumen adaptation (slow passage rates) to these rations. Fat, or lipid, deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as NEFA plus the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride. The liberated, or mobilized, NEFA have one of 3 desirable fates: 1. To be utilized by the mammary gland for milk fat synthesis; 2. To be used by peripheral tissues as a source of energy; and 3. To be reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). Complete oxidation of NEFA generates metabolites (acetyl coenzyme A) that can be used to generate energy via the Krebs Cycle. However, if the Krebs Cycle gets overloaded the acetyl Co A is shunted off to produce ketones (acetoacetic acid, acetone, and β hydroxybutyrate or BHB). Obviously, if ketones reach a high concentration in the blood the cow becomes ketotic. The normal concentration of plasma ketones (using BHB as an indicator) is less than 10 mg/dl. Clinical ketosis is defined as a concentration greater than 35 mg/dl. Concentrations between these 2 values are termed subclinical ketosis (Drackley, 1997). Duffield (1997) established that when BHB reaches 1400 μmol/l (14.6 mg/dl) in blood, the incidence of metabolic disorders increases and when the value is above 2000 μmol/l (20.8 mg/dl) milk production begins to suffer. With the background given above it might be curious to ask why the liver would accumulate fat if it can process the NEFA. When fat mobilization is high and the liver is reesterifying NEFA into triglyceride it cannot produce VLDL fast enough to export the fat and accumulation begins. This is because the liver has a very limited ability to produce VLDL due to a limited capacity to produce a key component (apoprotein B) (Marcos et al., 1990; Grummer, 1995). Once deposited, the fat accumulated in the liver will remain there until the end of the NEB (Grummer, 1993). Pronounced accumulation of fat in the liver with liver damage and/or reduced liver function (Van den Top et al., 1996) compromises, among other things, glucose synthesis. Most of the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid, amino acids, and the glycerol liberated from adipose. Rukkwamsuk et al. (1999) evaluated the capacity of gluconeogenesis by livers of fat and normal cows at calving. The fat cows had an increase of 446 % blood NEFA at 3 d postpartum compared to their prepartum NEFA concentration, while normal cows exhibited an increase of 123 %. Similarly, the concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only 97 %. The activity of liver enzymes indicated that gluconeogenic capacity of the fat cows was impaired. To minimize a predisposition of cows to ketosis and fatty livers it is necessary to avoid excessive weight loss in the pre- and postpartum transition period by minimizing the magnitude of the NEB. The weight loss, fat mobilization, NEB, increased plasma NEFA, and liver fat accumulation is inevitable in all high-producing cows. However, it is imperative to minimize these. We must make all attempts to maximize DMI, increase the energy density of the diets without sacrificing rumen function, and maintain BCS near recommended levels at this critical time. Rumen acidosis When acid production in the rumen resulting from fermentation of organic matter exceeds the capacity for the animal to absorb these acids or be neutralized, ruminal pH falls. This acidosis, even at the subclinical level, will cause a reduction in cellulolytic bacteria in the rumen and contribute to an overall reduction in feed digestibility. Furthermore, the acidosis reduces rumen motility and efficacy of mixing rumen contents, which reduces the amounts of VFA near the rumen wall. Consequently, VFA absorption is reduced (Allen and Beede, 1996). As rumen motility and mixing decline so does rumination, which reduces the amount of saliva flowing into the rumen. The secretion of buffers in the saliva is equivalent to more than 3 kg of sodium bicarbonate and 1 kg of disodium phosphate (Erdman, 1988). When NFC present in the rumen increases abruptly and rapidly, the production of VFA increases proportionately (Owens et al., 1998). If these VFA are not absorbed rapidly they will accumulate in the rumen (Schultz et al., 1993). Different problems are caused by rumen acidosis depending on the quantity of acids that accumulate in the rumen. When there is a mild accumulation, DMI and production can decline in spite of the cow appearing to be in good health (Owens et al., 1998). Also, the milk produced could have reduced fat. Certain species of bacteria and protozoa in the rumen are extremely sensitive to acidosis and release endotoxins and histamine. These substances can contribute to laminitis (Nocek, 1996). As the acid accumulation continues more severe problems can occur with DMI and production as well as with overall health (Schultz et al., 1993). It appears that this subclinical rumen acidosis is insidious and omnipresent in transition cows, as well as cows in early lactation. It is beyond the scope of this presentation to adequately describe this subject area, however, there are numerous publications dealing with its description and detection (Yokoyoma and Johnson, 1988; Nordlund, 1994; Allen and Beede, 1996; Hall, 1999). Based on the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase NFC in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to VFA, to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer TMR to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day, to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed), and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the postpartum diet. Direct microbial supplements are also being investigated with the aim of controlling lactic acid production (Kung, 1999). Displaced abomasum (DA) is frequently observed in high producing herds (Robertson, 1968; Robb et al., 1986). This disorder increases the risks of early culling, other disorders, and reduces productivity (Geishauser et al., 1998). It is logical that other disorders can also increase the risk of DA. Epidemiological studies have shown a correlation between DA and breed, age, parity, and season (Markusfeld, 1987; Constable et al., 1992). Hypocalcemia increases the risk of DA (Massey et al., 1993) probably because of the role of calcium in muscular tonicity. Nutrition has been implicated in the incidence of DA and these nutritional factors are controllable (Coppock, 1974; Cameron et al., 1998). These factors are: high BCS at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma NEFA (Cameron et al., 1998); reduced DMI in the transition period (Constable et al., 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio (Shaver, 1997). Consequently, feeding management designed to mitigate a decline in DMI prepartum and rapidly increase DMI postpartum will reduce the risks associated with DA. Logically, reduction of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever, ketosis, metritis, and retained placenta) will reduce the risk for DA. Increasing the energy density of the prepartum diet with grains equivocally affects the risk of DA. The reason for the equivocal nature of this long-held assumption is that if NFC is not increased, the rumen wall is not prepared for the abrupt increase in concentrates postpartum which will increase the risk for DA (Shaver, 1998). Moreover, if the prepartum transition diet is too low in energy, the NEB will be large leading to the other risk factors for DA as discussed previously. From the discussion above, it is obvious that preventing the decline in DMI prepartum, increasing DMI rapidly postpartum, and making certain that energy density is as high as possible in both transition phases are the most important control points for these cows. There are many non-nutritional modulators that affect DMI (Mertens, 1994; Rosseler, 1993). The nutritional factors include NDF content and digestibility and NFC content and fermentability, in both the pre- and postpartum diets. Including rumen buffers in the postpartum diet can also serve the cow well. The principal energy sources in a diet are carbohydrates and fat. Carbohydrates include both fiber (NDF) and non-fiber (NFC) categories. The proportion of NDF and NFC in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to maximizing DMI. Too high a content of NFC predisposes a cow to acidosis, reducing DMI; too low a content prepartum will also predispose cows to acidosis postpartum; too much NDF will also limit DMI (Mertens, 1994). A cow at the end of gestation should receive a diet with a minimum of 35 % NDF in the total DM (Shaver, 1993). For the postpartum transition period the recommendations are in the order of 28 to 32 % NDF in the total DM (Hutjens, 1995; Drackley, 1998). Following the transition period NDF recommendations can be reduced to 26 % with 3/4 of this NDF being contributed by high quality forages (Drackley, 1998). The addition of NFC to the diet is necessary in the transition period but should be done gradually. Furthermore, NFC fermentation will produce more propionic acid; thereby increasing the supply of glucose precursors and minimizing the use of glycogen reserves normally observed in the transition period. One can further speculate that if more glucose precursors are available in the form of propionate, then fewer amino acids will be used for gluconeogenesis in supplying energy to the cow. It was also suggested that by increasing NFC in the diet that a greater microbial mass would be present producing more microbial protein (Nocek and Russell, 1988). The recommendations for NFC for prepartum transition cows is 30 to 35 % of total dietary DM (Shaver, 1993). For postpartum transition cows NFC should be 38 to 40 % of total dietary DM (Drackley, 1998). It has been speculated that feeding supplemental fat would reduce fatty acid mobilization from body stores and reduce liver fat accumulation (Kronfeld, 1982). Fats in the diet are incorporated into lipoproteins in the intestine and absorbed into the circulation. As they are already in the form of lipoproteins they can be used directly by the tissues and, theoretically, not contribute to fat accumulation in the liver. The tissues produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to NEFA for utilization. The liver of ruminants lacks any appreciable quantities of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase (Emery et al., 1992). This makes perfect sense in that the liver is producing lipoproteins for other tissues and should not be able to extract them from the blood when it has an alternative, i. e. NEFA, as an energy source. Note that Kronfeld's (1982) speculation was that dietary fat would REDUCE, not halt, fat mobilization. We must recognize that adipose tissue can synthesize fat (use lipoproteins to make fat) and mobilize NEFA (hydrolyze body fat). However, the transition cow is likely to be in a state of lipolysis predominantly because of her energy balance status and her hormonal profile (low insulin and high cortisol) that does not favor body fat deposition. Therefore, it is unlikely that dietary fat will reverse the status of the adipose tissue from being catabolic (mobilization of fat) to anabolic (deposition of fat). Research results have been mixed in terms of feeding fat to transition cows; where some show a benefit and others do not (Skaar et al., 1989; Grum et al., 1996; Douglas et al., 1998; Bertics and Grummer, 1997). There are a variety of factors that we should consider in assessing a position on feeding fat to transition cows prior to seeing more definitive work on the subject. These are: 1) the experimental models used to assess feeding fat; 2) the quantities of fat fed; and 3) the fatty acid profile of the dietary fats. Let us discuss each of these and then try to synthesize a strategy. 1. The experimental model(s) used to assess feeding fat to transition cows. At best it is extremely difficult to amass groups of transition cows suitable to conduct research. Cows need to be of similar body condition score, parity, expected calving dates, and genetic potential at the onset of a trial; as all of these factors will affect the outcome and the reaction of the cow to any nutritional modification. As an example, thin vs. obese dry cows will have different dynamics in fat metabolism, DMI patterns, and nutrient needs both pre- and postpartum. These different cows will react differently to supplemental fat (or other nutrients). High producing cows postpartum will react differently to supplemental nutrients in the pre- and postpartum periods from lower producing cows as their needs, metabolic processes, and DMI differ from one another. This paper presents a practical, on-farm approach for the monitoring and prevention of production disease in dairy cattle. This integrated approach, should be used in an interdisciplinary way by farmers, veterinarians, nutrition advisors and other relevant professionals for the improvement of animal health and welfare and producer profitability. The key areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management, negative energy balance, hypocalcaemia, rumen health and trace element status. Monitoring criteria are described for each of these key areas, which when considered collectively, will facilitate the assessment of dairy cow health with regard to clinical and subclinical disease. The criteria, which are informed by published scientific literature, are based on farm management and environmental factors, clinical data, milk production records, dietary analysis, and assessment of blood and liver concentrations of various metabolites or trace elements. The aim is to review the efficacy of production disease control measures currently in place, and if necessary to modify them or formulate new ones. The objective of this review was to address the basis for and prevention of selected diseases (fatty liver, ketosis, rumen acidosis and displaced abomasums) that are feeding- and management-related and frequent in periparturient cows. The focus has been to discuss (1) the general physiological regulation and adaptations that are believed to be important for a successful transition to lactation, (2) for each disease the disease incidence rate, risk factors, aetiology and pathophysiology and (3) feeding and management strategies to prevent diseases. Unfortunately, few studies have documented prevention strategies and they consequently need to be developed based on risk factors and knowledge of the aetiology of the diseases. Strategies to prevent these diseases are therefore based on major factors directly or indirectly increasing the risk of fatty liver, ketosis, acidosis and displaced abomasum—factors such as over-conditioning at calving, excessive mobilisation of body fat, low nutrient intake, nutrient or diet specific factors and management and environmental stress. Finally, thoughts are presented on how prevention potentially could be improved in the future. It is suggested that there should be greater focus on individual animals in order to identify “risk animals”. Status-oriented strategies for optimising dairy cow health, reproduction and production are suggested that aims at securing a desirable status of epithelia, metabolism and immune function in different cells, tissues or organs through surveillance and health and production management based on indicators. Little research as focused specifically on the relationships among feeding behavior, management strategy, and optimal intake by the transition cow. Most information must be extrapolated from studies of cattle at other stages of lactation. The transition period can be divided into two distinct phases: 5 to 7 d prepartum, characterized by a 30% reduction in DMI, and 0 to 21 d postpartum, during which time intake should increase rapidly. Feed restriction can reduce number of daily meals by 50%, but when feed is offered for ad libitum consumption, with consistent time of feeding, access can be limited to 8 h daily with no adverse effects on performance of midlactation cows. Sequence of offering feeds may affect intake, but relative degradabilities of dietary protein and starch need to be considered. During early lactation, increased feeding frequency of a total mixed diet may most improve intake when dietary fermentability is moderate to high and management quality is poor. High-producing dairy cows achieve greater intake by increasing meal size and spending less time eating and ruminating per unit of intake. Control of feed intake and meal patterns may differ by parity and should be considered when grouping cattle. Daily exercise of tied dairy cows may not affect intake. Grouping strategy and group feeding behavior influence cow productivity and profitability. Competition for feed and space can be reduced by fenceline feeding vs bunks. Optimum intake during the transition period will occur only if feeding management accommodates normal feeding behavior of dairy cows.
