Literature linking the effects of prepartum nutrition and subsequent fertility is scarce. Most of what is suggested to optimize future fertility is related to relationships between metabolic disorders and risk for delayed conception. Common metabolic problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes, milk fever, ketosis, and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of ovarian cycles. Manipulation of the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (Hayirli et al., 2002) and postpartum lactational performance. Cows fed high fermentable energy diets prepartum have improved energy balance, reduced concentrations of plasma nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate, and reduced triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue. Hepatic lipidosis early postpartum has been linked with an extension in the postpartum anovulatory period (Reist et al., 2000) and reduced reproductive performance in lactating dairy cows (Jorritsma et al., 2000). It is difficult to determine whether the negative effect of triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue on postpartum resumption of ovarian cycles is direct, or just a consequence of negative energy balance. Nevertheless, diets that minimize the risk for hepatic lipidosis and ketosis are expected to improve postpartum energy balance and resumption of cyclicity. Minor et al. (1998) fed 50 multiparous and 25 primigravid Holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum, a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum, and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 d postpartum. Treatments were applied during the first 40 weeks of lactation. Feeding a high nonfirbrous carbohydrate diet prepartum increased dry matter and energy intake, which improved energy balance of cows throughout the transition period. Plasma glucose concentrations tended to be higher, and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet. Because of the positive effects on lipid metabolism, diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates increased concentrations of liver glycogen and reduced concentrations of hepatic triacylglycerol. The positive effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis, which might have positive effects on postpartum fertility. Although diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates improve energy status of transition cows, provision of adequate amounts of physically effective NDF is important to maintain rumen fill, thereby helping in the prevention of displacement of abomasum. Cows that develop displacement of abomasum have delayed postpartum insemination (Raizman and Santos, 2002), which might decrease reproductive efficiency. Diets with a net energy for lactation greater than 1.65 Mcal/kg were associated with increased risk for displacement of abomasum (Cameron et al., 1999). Little scientific information is available for the fiber requirements of dry cows to maintain adequate rumen health and minimize the incidence of displacement of abomasum. Mertens (1997) created a system to determine the effectiveness of NDF to stimulate rumination and to maintain milk fat concentrations. According to his data, fiber sources are classified according to their ability to stimulate rumination, which was directly related to the size of particle and suggested that lactating Holstein cows should receive diets containing at least 21% physically effective NDF in order to maintain milk fat content above 3.5%. Most prepartum diets contain between 30 to 40% NDF and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the specific herd. In farms with aggressive fresh cow programs, incidence of displacement of abomasum is below 2% of the total cows calving per year, and these herds can feed prepartum diets with less than 35% NDF, therefore higher energy diets. As I mentioned in one of my previous articles (Barragan 2020a), the transition period is one of, if not the, most challenging period for dairy cows during their production cycle. During this time, cows experience four main physiological challenges: a drop in dry matter intake, an increase in nutrient demands, immunosuppression, and systemic stress and inflammation (especially around calving). Therefore, the best approach to manage this group of animals is by addressing these challenges. If we think about the drop in intake and the increase in nutrient needs, the main negative effects are animals going into a negative energy balance (because they are using more nutrients than what they are consuming) and developing metabolic diseases such as ketosis and fatty liver. Now, we cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time, but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through proper management. Although cows will experience some degree of immunosuppression during this time regardless of management, an exacerbated stressful and/or inflammatory response may magnify this immunosuppression, increasing the risk of cows developing diseases. The losses for dairy cows associated with diseases are well known, but on top of affecting the welfare of cows and economics of the farm, these conditions have a long-term effect on the productivity and fertility of cows, decreasing milk production and conception rates, and increasing culling of animals. By modulating stress and inflammation after calving, the risks of developing diseases and poor performance may be decreased.
The management practices for transition cows must be focused on maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation. To maximize dry matter intake, diet composition — especially fiber and energy concentrations —is one of the most critical factors. Dr. Robert Van Saun clearly explained in our previous articles some of the key aspects for formulating transition cow diets (Van Saun, 2020). Although diet composition is important, I would argue that what we do with that diet is equally important. We could have the best formulated diet with the best ingredients, but if cows do not have access to it, the diet composition would be irrelevant. During this period, cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day, and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between feed deliveries. There are two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed delivery frequency. It is recommended to push feed up every two to four hours, with more frequent push ups (every 30 minutes) during the first two hours after fresh feed is delivered. With regard to feed delivery frequency, research has shown that when performed often, up to four times a day, this practice will stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat. However, feeding cows four times a day can be logistically complex in a farm setting, and the recommendation is to deliver fresh feed at least two times a day, ideally three, for this group of animals. Now, none of the practices above will work if cows are not offered a spot at the dining table, which leads to an important factor: proper stocking density. Although this is a broad topic, I will try to summarize it in a few sentences. There are two ways to measure stocking density; one of them is based on the lying surface, or stalls, and the other one is based on the feed bunk space. The safest way to assess this, to guarantee feed availability, is to use the feed bunk space method. By measuring the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen, the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can be estimated. Ideally, 30 inches of feed bunk space is required per cow in the pen, which will be equivalent to having a stocking density of 80%-85% based on number of stalls in the pen. Other practices that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with older cows. Many of the practices described above may modulate stress and inflammation to some degree; however, there are specific practices around calving that may have a greater effect. In one of our studies, we found that cows that experienced a difficult calving had an elevated inflammatory response in the days after calving, and subsequently, a higher risk of developing diseases compared to cows that experienced a normal calving. Therefore, timely identification and proper assistance of cows experiencing a difficult calving is critical to decrease inflammation and stress during this time. As I have mentioned in many of my previous articles (Barragan, 2020b), personnel training is the very first, and perhaps the most important, step to achieve this. In the same study, we found that cows that experienced dystocia and were treated with a mild anti-inflammatory drug produced almost 10 pounds per day more milk during the first 30 days after calving compared to cows that experienced dystocia but were not treated (Barragan et al., 2020a). Similarly, multiparous cows, regardless of calving difficulty, that were treated with this anti-inflammatory drug had lower systemic inflammation and produced almost 4 pounds per day more milk during the first 60 days in milk compared to cows that were not treated (Barragan et al., 2020c). In a more recent study, we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases, such as metritis, and also improved fertility (Barragan et al., 2021). Therefore, there may be an advantage to modulating inflammation after calving. If you noted, I said “modulating” and not “decreasing.” The reason behind this is that cows need the stress and inflammatory responses for natural processes such as parturition initiation and expulsion of the placenta. In a study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving, treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves, postpartum fever, retained placenta, metritis and decreased milk production. (Newby et al., 2017) Management of transition cows is one of the most important aspects of farm management that will set up dairy cows for success during the lactation period. The main goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation. Excellent diet formulation and feed bunk management are critical for decreasing the drop in dry matter intake; however, if cows do not have access to the diet, these practices will be meaningless. Calving monitoring and proper assistance, along with mild anti-inflammatory treatment, can be beneficial to modulate stress and inflammation after calving and decrease the losses associated with this period. At Drying Off, Selecting cows to dry off early or cull.Perform milk production planning. Dry off or cull cows that are lame, have high SCC or that are disease carriers (e.g.: leukosis) Confirm pregnancy before drying off. Aim for a body condition score between 2.75 and 3.2. Limit protein and energy intake Provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and withdraw concentrates. Provide an adequate mineral supply. Relocate the cow
Maintain water access. Use abrupt dry off for cows producing 15 kg of milk/day or less. Use intermittent milking if all of the other options fail to decrease milk production to 15 kg/day or less.  Limit intermittent milking to 2-3 days. Consider using a teat sealant.  The use of a teat sealant is strongly recommended when there will be a long dry period. Consult your veterinarian about adjusting the vaccination protocol if the cows are vaccinated at drying off.
Verify the Dry Off & Fresh Monitoring report. If there are a lot of fresh cows with high SCC, discuss dry cow management with your veterinarian because infections observed during the first 50 days of lactation have often been acquired during the dry period. Minimize stress, avoid overcrowding, provide a clean, dry and well ventilated environment. Ensure that there is adequate ventilation to minimize heat stress. Provide a minimum of 30 in. /head of space at the feed bunk.  For example, a round hay feeder with an 8-foot diameter and 18 sections will allow 15 cows to eat at the same time.
Control flies and parasites. Provide fresh water and clean waterers. Body condition score should ideally be maintained between 2.75 and 3.25. Monitor body condition once a month.
Prepare cows 25 days before calving and heifers 32 days before calving.
The average duration of a pregnancy is 280 days (Valacta, 2020).  Validate the pregnancy duration used by your software.
Group cow relocations to only take place once a week.
Relocate cows at least 21 days before their predicted calving date or right before labour begins.
Ensure that the alleys are not slippery when moving cows.
Evaluate the option of using the Rumensin bolus with your veterinarian.
Clip and wash the udder before calving. Use a specific ration for fresh cows if possible. Provide access to the ration 23 hours out of 24. Avoid ration sorting.  Validate with Penn State. Provide comparable feeds in the close-up ration and the fresh cow/early lactation ration
With conventional feeding, increase concentrates by around 350 g per day.
Transfer cows from the fresh cow group, to group 1 after approximately 7 DIM, when the intake, production and health are satisfactory. The transition period is roughly defined as three weeks prior to calving until three weeks after calving. This period is aptly named. Major metabolic transitions occur in a cow’s body as she converts from a non-lactating to a lactating state and undergoes the stress of parturition. Management transitions such as pen moves and ration changes are additionally occurring. Cows often fail to adapt to these metabolic and management changes, resulting in 75% of dairy cow disease incidence during the first month after calving and substantial economic losses to the dairy industry (LeBlanc et al., 2006). Not surprisingly, considerable research is being conducted to better understand transition cow physiology and to develop improved techniques for transition cow management. This review will begin with a discussion of the drop in intake during the transition period and how that drop relates to cow health. Next, three transition cow management strategies will be addressed: 1) supplementing monensin, 2) shortening dry periods, and 3) manipulating prepartum photoperiod. Each of these areas has received substantial attention in the past several years and each offers new tools to dairy producers managing cows during this difficult time. Finally, this review will conclude with a summary of transition cow management goals. The transition period is commonly accepted as the period from three weeks pre to three weeks post calving. However, the entire dry period is important and indeed the first 60 days after calving is also a critical window. Regardless of the system, whether a seasonal lower yielding system or a year round higher output system, the principles of transition cow management are the same. Periparturient diseases such as milk fever, ketosis, and displaced abomasums can all be associated with poor transition (see Table 1). The immense negative consequences on the metabolism of the early lactation cow due to failure of the transition period are great. One of the major negative impacts of poor transition cow management is immunosuppression. Poor transition cow management can impact all of the pillars of a successful lactation such as reduced productivity, fertility outcomes or health of the cow. Having cows in the correct body conditioning score (BCS) at all stages of the lactation cycle should always be a priority. The most important aspect of dry cow nutrition is to ensure the correct calving BCS. Thus, if BCS corrections are required in late lactation or at dry off, a nutritional strategy should be put in place to ensure an appropriate energy allowance is offered. The recommended BCS for dairy cows at each point of the lactation cycle is depicted in Table 2. The target body condition score at calving is 3.0-3.25. BCS is a subjective task and is an area where a valuable service can be provided by the attending vet practice, whether by vet or technician. The group of cows that calve from March on are most at risk of over-conditioning as this group often have a prolonged dry period. It has been proven that when dairy cows calve down in an over-conditioned state (BCS 4.0, scale 1-5) they have a higher level of BCS loss post-calving, a compromised metabolic state, and a reduced feed intake in early-lactation in comparison to cows with an appropriate BCS at calving (BCS 3.25, scale 1-5) at calving (Alibrahim et al, 2010). Dry cows (600kg) require 6.4, 7.1 and 8.1UFL per day when housed three months prior to, two months prior to and in the last month prior to calving, respectively.These requirements assume that cows are dried off with BCS on target (see Table 2). Grass silages are extremely variable in their major nutritional qualities. A very comprehensive study of pit silages carried out in Northern Ireland (Steen et al, 1998) reported huge variation in grass silage quality. When consumed at a typical consumption level by dry cows (1.8 to 2.0% of body weight; Butler et al, 2011), some grass silages will provide an insufficient amount of energy for pregnant dry cows and some will provide too much energy. If grass silage quality is poor, cows may lose BCS in the dry period. Furthermore, in years of low milk price and or poor grazing conditions in the autumn, cows may dry-off with a low BCS. In this case, care must be taken to ensure that cows end up with an appropriate BCS of 3.0 to 3.25 at calving (Roche, et al., 2009). Thin cows have been proven to have a significantly increased risk of lameness, uterine health issues and retained foetal membranes. If the low BCS persists to the breeding season, low fertility performance will result (Buckley et al, 2003). If the herd is thin in late lactation (eg. 50% of cows at BCS 2.5 and less), the option exists to dry off cows early, especially in years of low milk price. If dried off early (eg. A 14-week dry period), cows fed average quality grass silage (68 DMD) should have an increase in BCS of approximately 0.5 units before calving. If the low BCS is only noticed at dry off, eight weeks pre-calving, ad libitum good-quality or very good-quality grass silage is enough to increase BCS by 0.5 units (grass silage quality 72 DMD and above). With lowquality grass silage or where BCS is very low at dry off (eg. 2.0) concentrate supplementation may be required for dry cows. There are many theories on why non-structural carbohydrate should be fed to late pregnant dry cows such as developing rumen papillae, acclimatizing rumen microbes and avoiding fatty liver. It is also interesting to note that NRC (2001) advocate a 70% increase in energy density in the close-up dry cow diet. There is not a lot of research evaluating the requirement for these strategies in grass silage-fed dry cows going to grass post-calving. However, data from Burke et al (2010) for New Zealand dairy cows indicates that feeding nonfibrous carbohydrate in the late pregnant dairy cow diet had no effect on reproduction in grazing dairy cows. In Irish data, McNamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four weeks pre-calving. It is interesting that a large on-farm study recently completed in Northern Ireland did not find any benefit on milk production, fertility or culling as a result of supplementing concentrates for the final three weeks pre-calving for cows with BCS in the desired range. However, for thin cows, supplementing concentrates in the final three weeks pre-calving reduced the culling rate at 60- days post-calving (AgriSearch, 2010). Thus, the requirement for concentrate in the dry cow diet of most Irish cows (ca 5,000L of milk, 400kg F and P) should be driven primarily by concerns about BCS and silage quality. The requirement for the development of rumen papillae and to acclimatise rumen microbes for dry cows coming off a grass silage-based diet and receiving 4kg or less of concentrate feed in a grazing scenario, is unlikely to be significant, if BCS is on target. For cows that will be fed 8kg of concentrate or more in early lactation, a conservative approach in keeping with the normal digestive physiology of the cow would be to feed 1kg of starch in the last woweeks pre-calving. This could be 2kg of a dry cow nut, 2kg of barley or 3kg of maize silage or whole crop-wheat silage. This concentrate (starch) feeding at this time may be of increased importance for thin cows. The requirement for protein (PDI) in the last three months of the pregnancy for dry cows is approximately 475, 535 and 605g/d for a 600kg cow (O’Mara, 1996; Wolter and Ponter, 2012). In most cases, with grass silage only diets this amount of PDI will be supplied. However, difficulty arises if either the PDIN or the PDIE value of grass silage is less than 60g/kg of DM. Difficulties with PDI provision will also arise where straw or low protein forages might be included in the diet of the dry cow. It is important that silage is analysed to determine the need for supplementary protein. Although other feeding standards organisations (NRC, 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the PDI allowances, research work carried out in Ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage based diets. However, for diets based on grass silage and straw fed in restricted amounts, improvements in milk protein concentration were noted in early lactation following supplementary protein feeding in the dry period (Murphy, 1999). Thus, PDI balances should be calculated based on the farm specific forage(s) used in the dry cow diet, it is likely that supplementary protein may be required for dry cow diets containing straw, low-protein forages such as maize silage or low PDI grass silages. The early lactation cow is not to be forgotten and the start of lactation is a key time when we must ensure positive metabolic status to ensure optimal health and productivity and later, fertility is achieved. Grass dry matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg DM depending on the time of year. Good grazing management is necessary to have an idea what the grass availability is and what is actually being eaten in order that the correct supplementation level is offered. Additionally, the type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (Whelan et al, 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein and fat. As many cows will be managed indoors for the immediate early lactation period it is essential, regardless of how big or small the farm, that the early lactation cow diet is calculated to meet energy requirement for the appropriate level of production. There are a huge number of factors that determine energy allowance for example feed space, weather, grazing conditions, and silage qualities are all important. Whatever strategy is used to feed the early lactation cow, some consideration should be given to determine if nutrient supply is meeting nutrient demands at this crucial time in the production cycle. Therefore, grass and concentrate allowances should also be compared to the cows energy requirement using the UFL system. Major minerals, trace elements and vitamins are also important and the dry cow diet should include a specific dry cow mineral. Ideally, farm minerals are based on forage analysis and are selected based on what is complementary for the individual farm. Although not common, the UCD Herd Health Group have encountered problems where occasionally some farms may feed the same mineral to milking and dry cows inadvertently or push the milking cow total mixed ration (TMR) in to dry cows, this is important to look at, as the level of calcium for example will be entirely different and can be very dangerous with regard to milk fever control. Milk fever is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by some farms. Calcium homeostasis has a key role in the health of the cow at calving, clinical (the tip of the iceberg effect) and subclinical hypocalcaemia have a major detrimental effect on the early lactation cow in terms of health and production. It is not uncommon when questioned about the control strategy used on farms to prevent hypocalcaemia that there is none. Subclinical hypocalcaemia is linked to immune system competence. Roche (2003) demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from subclinical hypocalcaemia. In order to test for hypocalcaemia, the timing of the sample is important as it needs to be taken within 24 hours of calving making decent sample sizes difficult (10-12 cows/10% of the group). The first key area, already addressed, in the control of milk fever is the control of body condition score, maintaining BCS in the desired range at calving is a fundamental point in preventing milk fever. Magnesium supplementation is also important; 20-25g of supplemental magnesium is often required in silage-based dry cow diets. Magnesium plays a key role in the calcium homeostasis of the cow. Another fundamental player in milk fever prevention is potassium. High potassium, as is found in many grass silages, is implicated in the dietary cation anion difference (DCAD) or in simple terms high potassium induces a state of metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate in hypocalcaemia. Additionally, potassium is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in calcium regulation. Thus, it is vital that the level of potassium in the dry cow diet is understood – which requires mineral analysis of forages. In herds where potassium in the forage exceeds 2.5% of dry matter, a separate milk fever control strategy should be in place. Similarly, grass based dry cow diets are difficult to control mineral intake and therefore can be problematic with regards to milk fever control thus such herds with problems should consider ideally having cows three weeks indoors on a controlled ration pre-calving even if grass is utilised in the far off dry period. The role of minerals in the diet contributing to DCAD can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full DCAD strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms, for this to work the DCAD value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time of calving. Partial DCAD is another option for control of milk fever if implemented correctly. Whatever the strategy, it is important to consider what preventative measures if any are in place. The feeding environment is not to be underestimated in the role in the success of the transition period. Feed space is a huge issue and should be accurately measured in any dry cow accommodation. Feed space requirement depends on the weight of the cow and the amount of competition for food, estimates of minimal requirements of 0.6m per cow for a dry cow of 600kg BW or 0.8m for a lactating cow. Access to clean water is essential and an adequate area where cows can drink that is sufficient for the size of the dry cow area, fresh drinking water is essential to maximise feed intake. Offering fresh feed daily and not letting feed heat up or go off helps with intakes also. Offering feed in the calving area and close up accommodation is useful in milk fever control ensuring the cow has feed in front of her at all times. Cubicle management and stocking rate is also very important in early lactation. Minimising group changes and stressors such as moving to the home farm on the point of caving is another area for consideration. Mixing of heifers who are often naïve to the adult herd endemic diseases if reared off site is a careful consideration and thus in such cases mixing of heifers well before calving or managing as a separate group until after calving could be considered. It is essential that if we seriously want to assess transition that we assess all areas within our remit so any potential pitfalls can be identified. Walking the farm, measuring feed space, looking at the cows, body condition scoring is very important. We can also monitor some key areas with additional testing. Some recognised targets for disease incidence are included in Table 1. Other key areas for monitoring include monitoring of markers of energy balance – it is advised to measure a cohort at least 10-12 or 10% of large groups of dry cows between five to 15 days pre-calving for NEFA where >0.4mmol/l and BHB where > 0.7mmol/l is indicative of a problem with NEB. Post-calving the ideal window for herd monitoring for NEB is in the days 15-50 in milk, post calving the thresholds are different and NEFA >0.7mmol/l and BHB >1.4mmol/l are indicative of NEB. Milk solids can be used if routine milk recording is practiced to look at low milk protein and high fat:protein ratios in the early lactation group (0-60DIM) as an additional herd screening tool for NEB. No more than 10% of cows 0-60 in milk should have milk fat: protein >1.5 and no more than 10% early lactation cows should have a milk protein <3.05. In order to increase reliability of monitoring a combination of herd monitoring tools should be used to gain an accurate report of individual farm transition cow management. Transition cow management is central to the productivity, fertility, health and welfare of the dairy cow and is an area where meaningful engagement with farmers can have major positive welfare consequences for the cows and adds momentous value to the veterinary services provided for the farmer. Production diseases of the dairy cow are caused by a level of production inconsistent with nutrient intake, provision of an inadequate diet, an unsuitable environment, an inappropriate breeding policy or various combinations of these factors. Although the transition period of 3 weeks pre-calving until 3 weeks post-calving is associated with a peak incidence of production disease, the effects of these diseases on dairy cow health and productivity extend far into the following lactation. Recent advances in understanding of production diseases include the emergence of propylene glycol and rumen protected choline as the supplements of choice for preventing fatty liver and the absence of any preventative effect of increased energy density in the close-up dry period diet on this condition; the linear negative influence of dietary cation anion difference (DCAD) on the incidence of milk fever regardless of urinary pH or the target level of dietary DCAD achieved; the inflammatory response associated with subacute rumen acidosis and its effect on feed intake; an increased awareness of the potential for antioxidant status to improve immunity and health in the transition period; the development of more standardised diagnostic criteria and treatment protocols for uterine infection.
A significant body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine production diseases. One of the important challenges facing the dairy industry is the development, implementation and economic assessment of practical, integrated, blueprints of best practice for prevention of the production diseases and other diseases of the dairy cow. The transition period for a dairy cow is from 3 to 2 wk prepartum until 2 to 3 wk postpartum. The term transition is to underscore the important physiological, metabolic, and nutritional changes occurring in this time frame. It constitutes a turning point in the productive cycle of the cow from one lactation to the next. The manner in which these changes occur and how they are managed are of great importance as they are closely linked to lactation performance, clinical and subclinical postpartum diseases, and reproductive performance that can significantly affect profitability. Transition cow nutrition and management have received much attention in the research and popular-based literature in recent years because of the recognition of its importance in the productivity and health of cows. The problem that our research scientists are facing is their ability to gather enough cows of similar productivity characteristics in one place to conduct the research necessary to help us to understand this animal. Because of this difficulty, we have used animals outside of this short time frame and tried to simulate the same conditions that exist in the true transition cow. This method has given us a deeper understanding of the problems faced by these cows, but has also led to some confusion in interpreting data. Many reports exist citing the metabolic and health problems that occur with increasing productivity (Simianer et al., 1991; Jones et al., 1994; Emanuelson and Oltenacu, 1998) and with the economic losses associated with these (Drackley, 1999). The occurrence of health problems during the transition period is clearly a major complicating factor for subsequent reproductive performance (Ferguson, 2001), resulting in additional economic losses. Poor transitions also result in milk income losses. Every pound of milk lost from peak production represents a loss of 200 lb of milk for the lactation. Poor transition periods often result in the loss of 10 to 20 lb of peak milk (e.g., Wallace et al., 1996), which could represent 2000 to 4000 lb of unrealized milk yield. It is, therefore, pertinent to elaborate nutritional strategies to facilitate the passage of the cow through this transition phase; while minimizing health problems and optimizing productivity/ profitability for the remainder of the ensuing lactation. We will proceed with a review of the biology of the transition cow and the phenomena that mark this period with the goal of developing nutritional strategies. It is now well established that dry matter intake (DMI) decreases as calving approaches. Dry matter intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (BW) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 1.4 % BW in the 7 to 10 d period before calving. This 30 % decrease in DMI appears to occur very rapidly in the transition period. The decrease in prepartum DMI has classically been attributed to the rapid growth of the fetus taking up abdominal space and displacing rumen volume. However, there is no doubt that hormonal and other physiological factors have the most important impact on this phenomenon. A number of profound physiologic changes occur in the transition cow that modifies her metabolism drastically. The rapidly increasing demands of the fetus and the development of the mammary glands, including the initiation of synthesis of milk components, are causing these changes. Bell (1995) estimated that the daily demands for fetal and placental growth in the last 3 wk of gestation are 360 g of metabolizable protein and 3 to 5 Mcal of net energy. The concentration of plasma insulin continually declines in the transition period until calving and that of somatotropin increases rapidly between the end of gestation and the initiation of lactation. Concentration of plasma progesterone, which is high in gestation, rapidly falls at calving and there is a transitory elevation in estrogens and glucocorticoids in the periparturient period. These hormonal changes not only contribute to the decline in DMI, but also coordinate the metabolic changes that favor, if not force, the mobilization of body fat reserves from adipocytes (Grummer, 1995). Resulting from this mobilization of lipids, we observe an increase in concentration of plasma non esterified fatty acids (NEFA), which rise gradually in the prepartum transition period, but rapidly in the last 3 d of gestation. A portion of this increase in NEFA is obligatory and is under hormonal control while another portion is the result of an energy deficit (negative energy balance or NEB) (Bertics et al., 1992; Grummer, 1995; Dyk and Emery, 1996). The magnitude of the NEB prepartum, therefore, appears to be a variable that can be mitigated through nutritional management. Additionally, the NEB and resulting increase in plasma NEFA, if sufficiently high, contributes to the development of fatty liver; which itself is a contributing factor to other health problems in the postpartum period (Grummer, 1995; Dyk and Emery, 1996). It is not unusual for a high producing cow in the first 100 d in milk (DIM) to consume 22 kg of DM/d, of which more than half is in the form of concentrates, without posing any particular problems to the cow if the diet is well balanced. However, this same diet consumed by a fresh cow can cause a severe ruminal acidosis. The major difference in rumen function between these 2 stages of lactation can explain the different responses to the same diet. During the dry period, cows generally consume a diet that is principally composed of forages and, by consequence, is more fibrous than the type of diet offered in lactation. This nuance affects rumen function in 2 ways. First, the rumen flora is adapted to a diet that is low in non-fiber carbohydrates (NFC) during the dry period. allowing for a large population of cellulolytic bacteria and a low population of amylolytic bacteria. As the amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid, their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid (Goff, 1999). If the ration is changed abruptly at calving the capacity of the rumen flora to metabolize lactate, the principal acid responsible for acute rumen acidosis, is at a minimum at the initiation of lactation. The lactate producing bacteria increase in numbers rapidly as the amount of NFC in the diet increases, but the lactate-utilizing bacteria adapt more slowly (3 to 4 wk). Therefore, the risk of lactate accumulation in the rumen is high with abrupt changes from high to low fiber diets. Further, it is a known phenomenon that as DMI increases, rate of passage from the rumen increases as well. After calving, when DMI is relatively low, rate of passage is slow; allowing for greater extent of fermentation and acid accumulation in the rumen. If dietary NFC increases abruptly at calving, with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates, the amount of VFA produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of VFA in the rumen. This situation leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (SARA) and contributes to reduced DMI and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early postpartum period. The conditions described above favor the occurrence of health problems during the transition period. The principal metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: Disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver, ketosis, subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); Disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever, sub-clinical hypocalcemia, udder edema); and Problems related to the immune system (retained placenta, metritis, mastitis). A factor that has not received a lot of specific attention and is superimposed on all of this is the issue of protein requirements. This will be discussed subsequently as well. We will see in the next sections some of the etiology and preventive measures for these problems and the nutritional considerations related to these 3 axes. It is necessary to mention here that these disorders are interrelated and that the conditions conducive to the development of one problem in one category can lead to a disorder in another category. For example, milk fever or subclinical hypocalcemia can lead to loss of muscular tonicity resulting in an increased risk of retained placenta and/or displaced abomasums, in spite of retained placenta being classified as a problem related to the immune system. Curtis et al. (1985) conducted a retrospective analysis of the risk factors associated with metabolic problems. Their analysis revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta, milk fever, and mastitis. Cows having retained placentas were more at risk for developing mastitis and ketosis. Cows with ketosis were 12 times more likely to develop displaced abomasums. Generally, this analysis suggests that the prevention of one problem can decrease the incidence of others from developing. The transition period is marked by major hormonal changes. While these hormones are causing a reduction in DMI there is an increase in nutrient requirements by the cow to support fetal growth, mammogenesis, and lactogenesis (Bell, 1995; Grummer, 1995). This increase in nutrient demand is partially met by the DMI and partially by the mobilization of body tissues. Although the hormonal milieu will drive a certain amount of this body mobilization, excessive body catabolism is undesirable for health, reproduction, and milk production. It is, therefore, essential to pay particularly close attention to the formulation of rations in this transition period, both pre- and post-partum. Few published studies exist on transition period nutrition on a holistic basis. However, we will try to review the literature related to specific nutrients studied in this period of the cow's production cycle. The energetic demands of gestating cows reach 1.3 to 1.5 times the maintenance requirements by the end of gestation (Quigley and Drewry, 1998). The growth of fetal tissues follows an exponential curve beginning in the third trimester of pregnancy (Bell et al., 1995; House and Bell, 1994). For those using the Cornell Net Carbohydrate and Protein System (CNCPS) version 6.1; the fetal, placental, and mammogenesis requirements for nutrients are now more dynamic and added into requirements. During both the prepartum and postpartum transition period cows require more energy than they are able to consume resulting in the NEB and the concomitant loss of body weight (condition) to supply the necessary energy even in healthy cows (Bell, 1995). Grummer (1995) demonstrated that the NEB and body weight loss begins in the prepartum transition period, but that the NEB is greatest in the first week postpartum. However, there is much variation in the magnitude of the NEB after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (Garnsworthy, 1989), the severity of the depression in DMI (Bertics et al., 1992), the quality of the ration, and season. A severe NEB in the transition period can aid in the development of metabolic diseases, prolong the interval between calving and first ovulation and decrease fertility. Butler et al. (1981) showed that first ovulation in cows occurs 10 d after the nadir in NEB. Energy during the transition period; therefore, has a major impact on cow performance and longevity. Severe NEB also can lead to fatty livers and compromised liver function essential in all metabolic functions including detoxification. Glucose is a substance that plays a fundamental role in all living beings. In the last week of fetal development, the fetus uses an estimated 46 % of maternal glucose taken up by the uterus (Bell, 1995). Additionally, a cow producing 30 kg of milk/d uses at least 2 kg of blood glucose to synthesize lactose for milk (Bell, 1996). The end of pregnancy and the beginning of lactation; therefore, represent a time when there is a massive increase in need for glucose. This poses an enormous challenge for the liver that has to synthesize all of this glucose from propionate and amino acids as well as a challenge for other tissues and organs that have to adapt to a reduction of glucose availability. Glucose is an equally important energy source for the ovary and the reduced glucose availability in the beginning of lactation can negatively impact the re-establishment of ovarian activity after calving (Rabiee et al., 1999). The concentration of plasma insulin decreases dramatically as calving approaches and remains low in the first week postpartum. The concentration of plasma somatotropin increases dramatically and rapidly postpartum. This decrease in insulin combined with a decrease in sensitivity of adipose tissue to insulin and the increase in somatotropin results in a decrease in the synthesis of triglycerides in adipose and favors their mobilization (Bell, 1995; Lanna and Bauman, 1999). Therefore, there is a resulting increase in plasma NEFA at calving. The somatotropin, in concert with elevated cortisol, stimulates the liver to produce more glucose. These coordinated changes in metabolism permit the cow to respond to the accrued nutrient demands for milk synthesis. However, due to many factors, including those previously mentioned, the metabolic processes do not adjust sufficiently and a disequilibrated metabolism leads to many of the typical problems associated with transition cows. The mobilization of lipids in the beginning of lactation is a normal and required process to help the cow meet her energy demands for lactation. However, when the quantity and/or the speed of mobilization are exaggerated, the incidence of metabolic problems increase significantly. It is not uncommon to find a ketotic cow also having problems with fatty liver and displaced abomasum. Ruminal acidosis is also a frequent problem for cows at the beginning of lactation, because of highly fermentable rations and insufficient rumen adaptation (slow passage rates) to these rations. Fat, or lipid, deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as NEFA plus the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride. The liberated, or mobilized, NEFA have one of 3 desirable fates: 1. To be utilized by the mammary gland for milk fat synthesis; 2. To be used by peripheral tissues as a source of energy; and 3. To be reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). Complete oxidation of NEFA generates metabolites (acetyl coenzyme A) that can be used to generate energy via the Krebs Cycle. However, if the Krebs Cycle gets overloaded the acetyl Co A is shunted off to produce ketones (acetoacetic acid, acetone, and β hydroxybutyrate or BHB). Obviously, if ketones reach a high concentration in the blood the cow becomes ketotic. The normal concentration of plasma ketones (using BHB as an indicator) is less than 10 mg/dl. Clinical ketosis is defined as a concentration greater than 35 mg/dl. Concentrations between these 2 values are termed subclinical ketosis (Drackley, 1997). Duffield (1997) established that when BHB reaches 1400 μmol/l (14.6 mg/dl) in blood, the incidence of metabolic disorders increases and when the value is above 2000 μmol/l (20.8 mg/dl) milk production begins to suffer. With the background given above it might be curious to ask why the liver would accumulate fat if it can process the NEFA. When fat mobilization is high and the liver is reesterifying NEFA into triglyceride it cannot produce VLDL fast enough to export the fat and accumulation begins. This is because the liver has a very limited ability to produce VLDL due to a limited capacity to produce a key component (apoprotein B) (Marcos et al., 1990; Grummer, 1995). Once deposited, the fat accumulated in the liver will remain there until the end of the NEB (Grummer, 1993). Pronounced accumulation of fat in the liver with liver damage and/or reduced liver function (Van den Top et al., 1996) compromises, among other things, glucose synthesis. Most of the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid, amino acids, and the glycerol liberated from adipose. Rukkwamsuk et al. (1999) evaluated the capacity of gluconeogenesis by livers of fat and normal cows at calving. The fat cows had an increase of 446 % blood NEFA at 3 d postpartum compared to their prepartum NEFA concentration, while normal cows exhibited an increase of 123 %. Similarly, the concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only 97 %. The activity of liver enzymes indicated that gluconeogenic capacity of the fat cows was impaired. To minimize a predisposition of cows to ketosis and fatty livers it is necessary to avoid excessive weight loss in the pre- and postpartum transition period by minimizing the magnitude of the NEB. The weight loss, fat mobilization, NEB, increased plasma NEFA, and liver fat accumulation is inevitable in all high-producing cows. However, it is imperative to minimize these. We must make all attempts to maximize DMI, increase the energy density of the diets without sacrificing rumen function, and maintain BCS near recommended levels at this critical time. Rumen acidosis When acid production in the rumen resulting from fermentation of organic matter exceeds the capacity for the animal to absorb these acids or be neutralized, ruminal pH falls. This acidosis, even at the subclinical level, will cause a reduction in cellulolytic bacteria in the rumen and contribute to an overall reduction in feed digestibility. Furthermore, the acidosis reduces rumen motility and efficacy of mixing rumen contents, which reduces the amounts of VFA near the rumen wall. Consequently, VFA absorption is reduced (Allen and Beede, 1996). As rumen motility and mixing decline so does rumination, which reduces the amount of saliva flowing into the rumen. The secretion of buffers in the saliva is equivalent to more than 3 kg of sodium bicarbonate and 1 kg of disodium phosphate (Erdman, 1988). When NFC present in the rumen increases abruptly and rapidly, the production of VFA increases proportionately (Owens et al., 1998). If these VFA are not absorbed rapidly they will accumulate in the rumen (Schultz et al., 1993). Different problems are caused by rumen acidosis depending on the quantity of acids that accumulate in the rumen. When there is a mild accumulation, DMI and production can decline in spite of the cow appearing to be in good health (Owens et al., 1998). Also, the milk produced could have reduced fat. Certain species of bacteria and protozoa in the rumen are extremely sensitive to acidosis and release endotoxins and histamine. These substances can contribute to laminitis (Nocek, 1996). As the acid accumulation continues more severe problems can occur with DMI and production as well as with overall health (Schultz et al., 1993). It appears that this subclinical rumen acidosis is insidious and omnipresent in transition cows, as well as cows in early lactation. It is beyond the scope of this presentation to adequately describe this subject area, however, there are numerous publications dealing with its description and detection (Yokoyoma and Johnson, 1988; Nordlund, 1994; Allen and Beede, 1996; Hall, 1999). Based on the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase NFC in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to VFA, to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer TMR to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day, to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed), and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the postpartum diet. Direct microbial supplements are also being investigated with the aim of controlling lactic acid production (Kung, 1999). Displaced abomasum (DA) is frequently observed in high producing herds (Robertson, 1968; Robb et al., 1986). This disorder increases the risks of early culling, other disorders, and reduces productivity (Geishauser et al., 1998). It is logical that other disorders can also increase the risk of DA. Epidemiological studies have shown a correlation between DA and breed, age, parity, and season (Markusfeld, 1987; Constable et al., 1992). Hypocalcemia increases the risk of DA (Massey et al., 1993) probably because of the role of calcium in muscular tonicity. Nutrition has been implicated in the incidence of DA and these nutritional factors are controllable (Coppock, 1974; Cameron et al., 1998). These factors are: high BCS at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma NEFA (Cameron et al., 1998); reduced DMI in the transition period (Constable et al., 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio (Shaver, 1997). Consequently, feeding management designed to mitigate a decline in DMI prepartum and rapidly increase DMI postpartum will reduce the risks associated with DA. Logically, reduction of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever, ketosis, metritis, and retained placenta) will reduce the risk for DA. Increasing the energy density of the prepartum diet with grains equivocally affects the risk of DA. The reason for the equivocal nature of this long-held assumption is that if NFC is not increased, the rumen wall is not prepared for the abrupt increase in concentrates postpartum which will increase the risk for DA (Shaver, 1998). Moreover, if the prepartum transition diet is too low in energy, the NEB will be large leading to the other risk factors for DA as discussed previously. From the discussion above, it is obvious that preventing the decline in DMI prepartum, increasing DMI rapidly postpartum, and making certain that energy density is as high as possible in both transition phases are the most important control points for these cows. There are many non-nutritional modulators that affect DMI (Mertens, 1994; Rosseler, 1993). The nutritional factors include NDF content and digestibility and NFC content and fermentability, in both the pre- and postpartum diets. Including rumen buffers in the postpartum diet can also serve the cow well. The principal energy sources in a diet are carbohydrates and fat. Carbohydrates include both fiber (NDF) and non-fiber (NFC) categories. The proportion of NDF and NFC in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to maximizing DMI. Too high a content of NFC predisposes a cow to acidosis, reducing DMI; too low a content prepartum will also predispose cows to acidosis postpartum; too much NDF will also limit DMI (Mertens, 1994). A cow at the end of gestation should receive a diet with a minimum of 35 % NDF in the total DM (Shaver, 1993). For the postpartum transition period the recommendations are in the order of 28 to 32 % NDF in the total DM (Hutjens, 1995; Drackley, 1998). Following the transition period NDF recommendations can be reduced to 26 % with 3/4 of this NDF being contributed by high quality forages (Drackley, 1998). The addition of NFC to the diet is necessary in the transition period but should be done gradually. Furthermore, NFC fermentation will produce more propionic acid; thereby increasing the supply of glucose precursors and minimizing the use of glycogen reserves normally observed in the transition period. One can further speculate that if more glucose precursors are available in the form of propionate, then fewer amino acids will be used for gluconeogenesis in supplying energy to the cow. It was also suggested that by increasing NFC in the diet that a greater microbial mass would be present producing more microbial protein (Nocek and Russell, 1988). The recommendations for NFC for prepartum transition cows is 30 to 35 % of total dietary DM (Shaver, 1993). For postpartum transition cows NFC should be 38 to 40 % of total dietary DM (Drackley, 1998). It has been speculated that feeding supplemental fat would reduce fatty acid mobilization from body stores and reduce liver fat accumulation (Kronfeld, 1982). Fats in the diet are incorporated into lipoproteins in the intestine and absorbed into the circulation. As they are already in the form of lipoproteins they can be used directly by the tissues and, theoretically, not contribute to fat accumulation in the liver. The tissues produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to NEFA for utilization. The liver of ruminants lacks any appreciable quantities of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase (Emery et al., 1992). This makes perfect sense in that the liver is producing lipoproteins for other tissues and should not be able to extract them from the blood when it has an alternative, i. e. NEFA, as an energy source. Note that Kronfeld's (1982) speculation was that dietary fat would REDUCE, not halt, fat mobilization. We must recognize that adipose tissue can synthesize fat (use lipoproteins to make fat) and mobilize NEFA (hydrolyze body fat). However, the transition cow is likely to be in a state of lipolysis predominantly because of her energy balance status and her hormonal profile (low insulin and high cortisol) that does not favor body fat deposition. Therefore, it is unlikely that dietary fat will reverse the status of the adipose tissue from being catabolic (mobilization of fat) to anabolic (deposition of fat). Research results have been mixed in terms of feeding fat to transition cows; where some show a benefit and others do not (Skaar et al., 1989; Grum et al., 1996; Douglas et al., 1998; Bertics and Grummer, 1997). There are a variety of factors that we should consider in assessing a position on feeding fat to transition cows prior to seeing more definitive work on the subject. These are: 1) the experimental models used to assess feeding fat; 2) the quantities of fat fed; and 3) the fatty acid profile of the dietary fats. Let us discuss each of these and then try to synthesize a strategy. 1. The experimental model(s) used to assess feeding fat to transition cows. At best it is extremely difficult to amass groups of transition cows suitable to conduct research. Cows need to be of similar body condition score, parity, expected calving dates, and genetic potential at the onset of a trial; as all of these factors will affect the outcome and the reaction of the cow to any nutritional modification. As an example, thin vs. obese dry cows will have different dynamics in fat metabolism, DMI patterns, and nutrient needs both pre- and postpartum. These different cows will react differently to supplemental fat (or other nutrients). High producing cows postpartum will react differently to supplemental nutrients in the pre- and postpartum periods from lower producing cows as their needs, metabolic processes, and DMI differ from one another. This paper presents a practical, on-farm approach for the monitoring and prevention of production disease in dairy cattle. This integrated approach, should be used in an interdisciplinary way by farmers, veterinarians, nutrition advisors and other relevant professionals for the improvement of animal health and welfare and producer profitability. The key areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management, negative energy balance, hypocalcaemia, rumen health and trace element status. Monitoring criteria are described for each of these key areas, which when considered collectively, will facilitate the assessment of dairy cow health with regard to clinical and subclinical disease. The criteria, which are informed by published scientific literature, are based on farm management and environmental factors, clinical data, milk production records, dietary analysis, and assessment of blood and liver concentrations of various metabolites or trace elements. The aim is to review the efficacy of production disease control measures currently in place, and if necessary to modify them or formulate new ones. The objective of this review was to address the basis for and prevention of selected diseases (fatty liver, ketosis, rumen acidosis and displaced abomasums) that are feeding- and management-related and frequent in periparturient cows. The focus has been to discuss (1) the general physiological regulation and adaptations that are believed to be important for a successful transition to lactation, (2) for each disease the disease incidence rate, risk factors, aetiology and pathophysiology and (3) feeding and management strategies to prevent diseases. Unfortunately, few studies have documented prevention strategies and they consequently need to be developed based on risk factors and knowledge of the aetiology of the diseases. Strategies to prevent these diseases are therefore based on major factors directly or indirectly increasing the risk of fatty liver, ketosis, acidosis and displaced abomasum—factors such as over-conditioning at calving, excessive mobilisation of body fat, low nutrient intake, nutrient or diet specific factors and management and environmental stress. Finally, thoughts are presented on how prevention potentially could be improved in the future. It is suggested that there should be greater focus on individual animals in order to identify “risk animals”. Status-oriented strategies for optimising dairy cow health, reproduction and production are suggested that aims at securing a desirable status of epithelia, metabolism and immune function in different cells, tissues or organs through surveillance and health and production management based on indicators. Little research as focused specifically on the relationships among feeding behavior, management strategy, and optimal intake by the transition cow. Most information must be extrapolated from studies of cattle at other stages of lactation. The transition period can be divided into two distinct phases: 5 to 7 d prepartum, characterized by a 30% reduction in DMI, and 0 to 21 d postpartum, during which time intake should increase rapidly. Feed restriction can reduce number of daily meals by 50%, but when feed is offered for ad libitum consumption, with consistent time of feeding, access can be limited to 8 h daily with no adverse effects on performance of midlactation cows. Sequence of offering feeds may affect intake, but relative degradabilities of dietary protein and starch need to be considered. During early lactation, increased feeding frequency of a total mixed diet may most improve intake when dietary fermentability is moderate to high and management quality is poor. High-producing dairy cows achieve greater intake by increasing meal size and spending less time eating and ruminating per unit of intake. Control of feed intake and meal patterns may differ by parity and should be considered when grouping cattle. Daily exercise of tied dairy cows may not affect intake. Grouping strategy and group feeding behavior influence cow productivity and profitability. Competition for feed and space can be reduced by fenceline feeding vs bunks. Optimum intake during the transition period will occur only if feeding management accommodates normal feeding behavior of dairy cows. 1, Monitoring Negative Energy Balance in Transition Cows for Better Dairy Herd Results

Introduction 

Most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (NEB) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (Hayirli et al., 2002). The ability to partition available energy for milk production early in lactation (Bauman and Currie, 1980) has made the role of energy balance a key factor in the study of milk production, reproductive performance, and disease occurrence. The metabolites non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (BHB) are common measures of NEB and/or ketosis in transition animals (Duffield et al., 2009). Although some elevation of these metabolites is normal as these animals balance energy intake and energy demands, excessive elevation can indicate poor adaptation to NEB (Herdt, 2000). Identification of an objective level where NEFA and/or BHB are excessive and cause detrimental effects on health, reproduction and milk production, has been difficult due to individual animal variations, normal metabolite elevations during the transition period, and the multiple herd level factors that can affect the outcomes of interest. The objectives here were to: 1. identify critical thresholds above which NEFA and BHB concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2. investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall, TMR-fed herds; 3. evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above NEFA and BHB critical thresholds; 4. evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5. intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6. identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7. evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with propylene glycol.

Conclusion of intensive study in high performing herds.

In well managed TMR fed free-stall herds in the northeast and upper Midwest, the incidence and thus prevalence of SCK is high. SCK is a condition not recognized clinically until it predisposes cows and herds to higher incidences of transition cow diseases, lower milk production, and lower milk production. Thus it is a costly condition. Work with your management team to develop a testing strategy to assess your level. Treating SCK cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put in place.

2, Managing the challenges in transition dairy cows

Abstract The transition from late gestation to lactation is a period of many physiological changes, and a critical time to ensure cows are well prepared for a profitable and healthy lactation. There are many opportunity areas to implement management practices mitigating the risk of early lacta¬ tion catabolic armageddon. Most dynamic activities will be better implemented if they are consistently measured and monitored. While comparison to external benchmarks is inherently dangerous to sound decision making, we aim to provide a framework such that a dairy can begin to internally calibrate its management metrics. Monitoring performance metrics that have little momentum, bias, and lag will help dairy farms reach their goals. Systematic recording of clinical diseases with consistent case definitions is 1 of the best groups of metrics to monitor. We suggest lactational incidences of DAs < 3%, clinical milk fever < 2%, and retained fetal membranes of < 8%. Subclinical disease has also been shown to be very costly to dairy performance. We advise hyperketonemia (defined as BHB concentration >1.2 mmol/L) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for first-parity heifers. To achieve these low disease risks and have high milk production, there are many management areas to also monitor. For nutritional management of far-off cows, we suggest examining diet formulation and aiming for 110 to 120% of metabolizable energy (ME] requirements and over 1000 g/d of metabolizable protein (MP}. The diets of close-up cows should be formulated to provide 110 to 130% ME, but not more, and over 1200 g/d MP. Routine inspection of the dietary cation anion difference (DCAD] should be performed to ensure herd goals are being met. If aiming for a negative DCAD by feeding anionic salts, monitoring urine pH weekly, and ensuring it's adequately acidified is good practice. Delivery of this diet is equally important to formulating it. Given the bulkiness and potential palatability challenges of these recommended diets, it's prudent to monitor the particle size and using the Penn State Particle Separator weekly. We counsel 10 to 20% on the top screen, 50 to 60% in the middle, and < 40% in the bottom pan, with the long straw or hay particles not more than 4 cm. Further, it is important to continuously measure the DM and keep the TMR wet enough to be 46 to 48%. Our field observations corroborate that stocking transition cows at 80% of headlocks or 2.6 ft (0.8 m] of bunk space per cow is beneficial, and these metrics should be evaluated often. Consistent and accurate recording of actionable metrics can allow for timely interventions to ensure the dairy is proactively addressing transition cow opportunities.

Physiological changes during the transition period. The transition to lactation is a period of many physiological changes and a critical time to ensure cows are well prepared for a successful lactation. Immediately after calving, cows experience large changes in nutrient demands and many metabolic adaptations occur to maintain homeorhesis.1 Of foremost interest are the adaptive mechanisms to maintain calcium and energy homeostasis. Calcium is necessary for all muscle and nerve function, and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition.1 These processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum, and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of milk production. When this system is out of balance, hypocalcemia can result.14,15 Occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (DMI) that occurs in the periparturient period, which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy balance (NEB). With the increased glucose demand for milk lactose synthesis,237 alternative fuel sources are mobilized. This results in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue, manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (NEFA) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues, and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland.2-11 The formation of ketone bodies (BHB, acetoacetate, and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues.11 However, when there is excessive ketone body formation, hyperketonemia can result.16’26 Higher DMI post-partum generally results in lower circulating NEFA and BHB and has been associated with improved health, performance, and less severe post-partum NEB.18 Optimizing DMI during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health and production. The immune system also enters a period of imbalance during the transition to lactation, and cows experience a decrease in immune function surrounding parturition. Ensuring maximal immune system function is essential for expulsion of the placenta after calving, uterine involution, and appropriate efficacy of bacterial defense mechanisms to prevent mastitis. A dysregulated immune system increases susceptibility to infection, and retained placenta, metritis, and mastitis can result.

Opportunities to improve transition cow management Hypocalcemia, NEB, and immune dysfunction are related; while all occur to some extent during the transition period, our goal as managers is to minimize the severity and duration of these states. When states of hypocalcemia, NEB, or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time, they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their full potential. Often producers will record disease or disease treatments on-farm; however, the recording of only disease treatments rather than the disease state can be problematic in that this may be underreporting the true disease incidence or an overestimation of disease incidence if each episode of treatment is recorded as a disease event. For example, in the case of mastitis, herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded, all gram-negative cases might not be recorded, and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would be underestimated. Conversely, if each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event, the true incidence of mastitis would be grossly overestimated. Consistent definitions of disease state and reliable recording of these events over time are necessary to appropriately monitor the health of the herd. Particularly in large herds, computer recording of transition cow disease events can facilitate timely monitoring of the herd's health and action for individual cows. Clinical diseases are timely metrics to monitor on a lactational incidence basis, given that the cow is at risk for most diseases only once per fresh period. Mastitis is a notable exception, but using a "gap" definition (e.g. 14 days) aids in proper recording. Internally consistent definitions are important for this recording to be meaningful and avoiding bias. Further, diseases like DA, retained fetal membranes, and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and lag either. However, most transition cow diseases have a range of severity, and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd.1213-35 The consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health, reproduction, and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease.6’26-32 Non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the transition period. When sampled in the appropriate time frame, pre- and post-partum NEFA and BHB concentra¬ tion above certain thresholds are associated with negative downstream outcomes such as increased risk of disease, and decreased milking and reproductive performance at the individual cow level. BHB concentrations can be measured qualitatively or quantitatively with several tests of varying sensitivities and specificities both cow-side or in laboratories. Currently, NEFA concentrations can only be measured quantitatively in laboratories. At the cow level, the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum BHB > 0.6 to 0.8 mmol/L; pre-partum NEFA > 0.3 to 0.5 mEq/L; post-partum NEFA > 0.7 to 1 m Eq/L; and post-partum BHB > 1.0 to 1.4 mmol/L.27 At the herd level, negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above.6-32 Herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity, especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes.33 An initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere,33 e.g., test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to 14 DIM. Any animal with a BHB concentration > 1.2 mmol/L is considered positive and should receive 300 mL of propylene glycol (PG) for 5 days. If 15% or fewer of the animals sampled (3 to 14 DIM) have a BHB concentration > 1.2 mmol/L, the recommendation is to sample again every other week to monitor herd-level prevalence of elevated BHB. More frequent sampling may be indicated when there are significant changes in diet formulation, management, or environment. If > 15 to 40% of the animals sampled (3 to 14 DIM) have a BHB concentration > 1.2 mmol/L, the recommendation is to test all animals that are 3 to 9 DIM twice weekly (e.g. Tuesday and Friday) and treat all positive cows. This more frequent testing scheme is warranted in order to identify and treat most of the cows with elevated BHB, thus reducing their risk of negative downstream outcomes. If at least 2 consecutive prevalence tests independently result in fewer than 15% of the animals testing positive, then one could consider stopping this testing and treating protocol and monitor the prevalence every 2 weeks as described above. If > 40% of the animals sampled (3 to 14 DIM) have a BHB concentration > 1.2 mmol/L, the recommendation is to start treating all fresh cows with PG at 3 DIM for 5 days. This treatment scheme will help reduce the negative effects of elevated BHB concentrations in herds with a very high prevalence. Recheck the prevalence in 2 weeks to determine the next course of action, e.g. you can stop treating all cows and move to the test-and-treat positive cow scheme or remain in the treat-all-cows protocol. This monitoring scheme should continue until at least 2 consecutive prevalence tests independently result in fewer than 40% of the animals testing positive. Economic impact of transition cow diseases For cows that develop any transition cow disease, the total cost of that disease can be divided between component costs and attributable costs, where the component costs are the sum of the direct and indirect costs of that particular disease and the attributable costs include the increased risk of developing another related disease. The direct costs of a disease include labor and veterinary services associated with diagnosis and treatment, therapeutic interventions, and discarded milk required for these interventions. Indirect costs consist of future losses such as milk production, premature culling of the cow as a result of the disease, and negative impact on future reproduction. While most people readily realize the direct costs associated with a disease, interestingly these make up a relatively small part of the total cost of a disease. Hypocalcemia impacts a large proportion of cows post-partum.15-36 In a study including 55 dairy herds across the United States, herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence, and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service.6 With such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds, these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a herd level. Single large-herd annual costs due to hypocalcemia have been estimated to exceed $50,000 per year.36 For hyperketonemia, the average component cost per case is estimated to be $117.28 Interestingly, the direct costs associated with the disease are only approximately 6% of the total cost, with the remaining 94% of associated costs being indirect, largely future reproductive and milk production losses. When including the costs of other diseases attributable to hyperketonemia (i.e. metritis and DA), the total cost per case is almost $290. With herd early-lactation hyperketonemia incidences averaging 40%,13 26 annual costs due to hyperketonemia are not trivial. Hypocalcemia and hyperketonemia, as mentioned above, have an effect on proper immune function, thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or calcium deficiencies. A cow diagnosed with mas¬ titis is 4.2 times more likely to have another case of clinical mastitis during the subsequent lactation,34 and cows with early lactation mastitis experience decreased milk production and have a poorer pregnancy risk to first insemination.39 The average total cost for a case of mastitis in the first 30 DIM is $444, with $128 in direct costs and $316 in indirect costs; the majority of indirect cost is associated with future milk loss.38 Nearly 40% of cows that calve develop metritis, and multiparous cows with metritis produce less milk, have lower pregnancy risks, and are more likely to be culled than healthy cows.40 The average cost per case of metritis is estimated to be $396, with 30% due to direct costs and 70% to indirect costs.28 The average cost per case of DA is estimated to be $700, with 70% due to direct costs and 30% to indirect costs.28 The high incidence and/or high cost of these post¬ partum diseases highlights the importance of minimizing disease incidence for both individual animal health and herd profitability. Key areas of management to optimize post-partum health, production, and reproduction Dairy herds vary widely in the degree to which they achieve success in maintaining excellent health, both in terms of clinical and subclinical health disorders, high milk yield during early lactation, and return to estrous cycling with high fertility in the post-partum period. We believe that the degree of success relates directly to the net effects of an integrated and dynamic set of factors that include nutritional management [both ration formulation and implementation), facility characteristics, grouping management, and overall cow/herd management. Herds vary also in their ability to detect and react to changes in each of these areas, which also contributes to their degree of overall success in transition period management. Authors of other chapters will be able to provide more depth related to each of these areas - the purpose of this section is to highlight key areas of management and principles within each of these areas for best practices. Nutritional management of dry cows Traditionally, nutritional management of dairy cows during the far off dry period [i.e. approximately 60 to 30 days prior to calving) has received little attention. Indeed, many aspects of nutritional management (e.g., mineral nutrition beyond meeting basic nutrient requirements) appear to be much less important during the far-off period compared to the close-up period. However, several studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes, increased mobilization of body tissue, increased circulating concentrations of NEFA and BHB, and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and reproductive performance. We typically target diet formulation to meet 110 to 120% of energy requirements during this period and metabolizable protein supply for Holsteins of over 1,000 g/d. During the far-off period, macromineral considerations such as potassium are not of great concern, thus a wider array of forages and feeds are acceptable to form the basis of diets. Nutritional considerations for close-up cows There are several areas of critical importance for nutritional management of dairy cows during the close-up period [i.e. typically less than 30 days prior to calving). These include macromineral nutrition, energy nutrition, and protein and amino acid nutrition. Macromineral nutrition to improve calcium status. Clinical milk fever is well managed on many dairies. Recent philosophy has shifted the hypocalcemia focus to include management of subclinical drops in blood calcium post¬ partum. Even in herds with very low milk fever incidence, subclinical hypocalcemia [SCH) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd, predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential.5'25 36 As these associations continue to be understood, the need for strategies to reduce SCH incidence is becoming more evident. Reducing the dietary cation anion difference [DCAD; Na + K - Cl - S = mEq/100 g DM) of the prepartum ration is a tried and true method for decreasing rates of clinical milk fever.316 Strategies for implementing this approach can range from minimizing the dietary potassium [aiming for a low but still positive DCAD) to varying inclusion rates of anion supplements to reach a negative DCAD. Recently, both Weich et al45 and Sweeney et al42,43 demonstrated both improved Ca status and increased DMI and milk yield post calving for cows fed anionic diets during the dry period. Furthermore, strong consensus exists regarding the importance of also supplementing Mg during the prepartum period to help with the homeostatic mechanisms responsible for increasing blood Ca. Measuring urine pH is an essential component of monitoring prepartum DCAD, and can also provide valuable information about feeding management.7,21 Urine pH should be measured in midstream urine samples from approximately 12 to 15 cows weekly. It is important that the time relative to feeding is consistent from week to week, since urine pH response may fluctuate throughout the day. Large variation from cow to cow within a week may indicate undesirable consumption of the ration, whether that be a result of over¬ crowding, social factors, or sorting due to poor diet mixing. Variation in average urine pH from week to week can indicate inconsistency in ration mixing or changes in feed ingredient composition. This information can be used to improve feeding and management strategies to increase transition cows Energy nutrition of close-up cows. As described above, controlling energy intake of close-up cows so that they meet, but do not dramatically exceed, their energy requirements during this period is a critical target. As has been well-documented previously and supported by recent research,30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated NEFA concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders, lower milk production, and poorer reproductive performance. We typically target energy intake of cows during the close-up period at 110 to 130% of energy requirements. For Holsteins, this is in the range of 16 to 18 Mcal/day of NEL. As a starting point, our recommendations would be to formulate the close-up diet at approximately 1.45 Mcal/kg of NEL if the group is a commingled cow/heifer group and approximately 1.38 to 1.40 Mcal/kg of NEL if the group is composed of mature animals and DMI is high. These energy densities are adjusted based upon actual DMI of cows on farms to achieve the overall targets for energy intake during the close-up period described above. Protein and amino acid nutrition. We target metabolizable protein supplies of at least 1,200 to 1,300 grams per day for cows during the close-up period. Given that lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch], microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 2.2 to 4.4. lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation outlined above. Furthermore, research generally supports formulation of methionine and lysine in close-up rations at levels similar to those used for lactating cows. Feeding management of dry cow rations. Even the best formulated rations will not be effective if they are not well implemented. Bulky rations with the forage base consisting of either straw or mature, low-potassium hay blended with corn silage and a grain mix can be easily sorted by cows if the straw or hay is not chopped, ideally prior to mixing into the TMR. In new research conducted by our group23 involving 72 commercial dairy farms in New York and Vermont, only 25% of the pre fresh TMR had particle size within recommended ranges (10 to 20% on the top screen; 50 to 60% in the middle; < 40% in the pan] using the Penn State Particle Separator (PSPS]. We recommend chopping the straw or hay such that the long particles are no more than 1.8 inches (4 cm] (33% on each of the 3 sections of the PSPS]. Often, addition of water or another wet ingredient to decrease the ration dry matter into the 46 to 48% range is also required for optimal effectiveness of these rations. Accuracy and consistency in feed delivery and composition are paramount to a successful transition feeding program. Post-partum nutritional strategies and fresh cow diets. We believe that there will be significant advances in our understanding of the nutritional needs of the cow during the immediate post-partum period during the next 5 years. Evidence from our group and Miner Institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in fresh diets. Furthermore, there may be opportunities for additional MP and AA during the immediate post-partum period.22 Grouping and facility factors in transition cow management Even the best formulated nutritional approach to dry cows can become derailed by issues with grouping and facility management of transition cows. In general, these are difficult areas in which to conduct controlled research because of the need for replicated pen designs if studying group-housed cows for many factors. Thus, our knowledge base is a combination of controlled research, observational studies, and field experience. The major factors at play in most transition management scenarios are stocking density, commingling of cows and heifers, frequency and number of pen moves, and heat abatement. Stocking density. Of all of the grouping/facility factors that have been evaluated in the context of transition cow management, stocking density of groups during the prepartum period has received the most attention.8 29 Most of the current recommendations (e.g., optimal stocking density at 80% of headlocks or 30 in (0.8 m] of bunk space per cow8] are based largely on observational work rather than randomized trials in which the benefits of decreased stocking density were observed in primiparous cows only. Although field experience certainly corroborates the benefits of decreasing stocking density in many situations, these observational studies do not lend themselves to truly determine the optimal stocking density, and the optimal stocking density surely varies across farms based upon other grouping management/ facility characteristics. Commingling primiparous and multiparous cows. We think that eliminating the commingling of primiparous and multiparous cows that is common during both the prepartum and post-partum periods, even on larger dairy farms, remains a major opportunity for freestall dairy farms. Data from Ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period, suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated NEFA during the prepartum period, which clearly indicated that DMI was compromised in these animals.32 Furthermore, nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated NEFA during the post-partum period. Although controlled research on commingling is even more lacking than that for stocking density, it is worth noting that the effects of stocking density reported by Nordlund et al above were confined to milk yield responses in primiparous cows.29 Pen moves. One of the major areas of focus by Cook and Nordlund was the issue of the number of pen moves made during both the prepartum and post-partum periods.8 In many freestall transition management systems, it is not uncommon for cows to make 5 to 6 moves during the 6-week period around calving. They advocated for elimination of group moves 2 to 5 d before calving and shortening of the period spent in a post-fresh monitoring group. Their basis for this was a collection of older studies that suggested that social adaptation to new groups ranged from 48 h to 7 d, with low-rank cows more affected by the regrouping. Although controlled evidence specifically focused on pen moves, and their timing during the transition period is largely lacking, the overall practice of streamlining grouping changes during this time appears to have yielded dividends on farms in terms of fresh cow health and calving management. Heat stress abatement. Tao and Dahl reviewed the literature related to heat stress and the implementation of heat abatement strategies during the transition period and the effects on the dam and the calf.44 Their summary suggests remarkably consistent and beneficial results of heat abatement both on the subsequent performance of the dam and also the calf through its developmental cycle. Future Opportunities Immune regulation and inflammatory response As we continue to increase our understanding of immune regulation in the transition dairy cow, it becomes an emerging area for future improvements in dairy management. During the periparturient period, cows experience a period of immune dysregulation. We currently define dysregulation of the immune response as the inability to fight infection efficiently by mounting an adequate inflammatory response and controlling it without excessive damage to the animal. Neutrophils play an important role in the innate immune system and are rapidly mobilized and activated in response to the inflammation stimulated by an infection. The endocrine and metabolic adaptation through the transition period is known to affect the innate immune system's response to infection by reducing the ability to appropriately activate neutrophils and other immune cell types. In addition, the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta, metritis, endometritis, and mastitis.41 As with these disease outcomes, increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success,17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on productive outcomes. Re¬ search in post-partum systemic inflammatory response and the effects on health and productivity in transition dairy cows has yet to clarify to what extent and persistency inflammation should be considered a normal adaptive response.4 From a management perspective, overcrowding, comingling of fresh heifers and mature cows, competition at the feedbunk, excessive pathogen pressure, heat stress, and stressful handling situations all affect the ability of the transition cow's immune system to adequately react to infectious challenges. The interplay between metabolic adaptation and immune function is particularly important during this period as the dietary supply of energy, protein, macro- and microminerals in relation to requirements, as well as the fatty acid balance, affect immune regulation. The persistency and degree of systemic regulation, as well as tissue-specific inflammation in the post-partum period and its effect on the dairy cow's productivity and health, pose an exciting and challenging field of future research, as we continue to define physiological adaptive changes during this time and improve management strategies to minimize peripartal immune dysregulation. Technology and future opportunities Interest in using technology to help with on-farm transition cow decision making and early disease detection has increased in recent years. Rumination monitoring technology can be a valuable management tool, allowing for earlier identification and intervention of fresh cows with metabolic disorders as well as assisting with assessment of treatment effectiveness. At calving, rumination sharply decreases with a slow increase post calving, and lower rumination time post-partum has been associated with an increased risk of metabolic disorders. Rumination is highly sensitive to cow well-being, and cows are able to voluntarily control rumination and have the ability to stop ruminating when disturbed. Under periods of acute and chronic stress, rumination activity is depressed; changes in rumination in response to stressors can be detected between 12 to 24 h earlier than traditional measurements such as temperature elevation, decreased feed intake, or decreased milk yield. Using rumination monitoring data can help modify traditional fresh cow examinations with less disturbance of cows, decreased time in headlocks, less labor, and more focus on high-risk cows. This allows for timely identification of individual cows in need of intervention as well as group variations that can be used to evaluate transition cow facilities and management practices. In-line milk analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical NEB disorders and mastitis. These systems increase the ability of identifying individual cows in need of attention and can enable action before clinical signs are visible. As genomic technologies progress, we have the increasing ability to utilize these technologies to identify sires that are high immune responders and offer improved adaptation to the metabolic challenges of the transition period. We can then use these tools to improve breeding decisions and select for traits that optimize transition cow health and immune competence.

3, Elevated non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

Dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to early lactation. Poor adaptation through this period, expressed as excessively elevated concentrations of non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) pre- or post-partum and elevated concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate post-partum, increases an individual animal’s risk of post-partum disease, removal from the herd, reproductive difficulty, and reduced milk production. Field studies have shown that subclinical ketosis often affects 40% of cows in a herd although the incidence can be as high as 80%. Peak incidence occurs at 5 days in milk, and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week of lactation.

Herds with more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of NEFAs and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events, poorer reproduction, and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative energy balance. This paper reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites, (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds), (3) treatment approaches for affected cows, and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative energy balance.

Negative energy balance (NEB) is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle as they transition from late gestation to early lactation. This transition period is often considered to occur from 3 weeks pre-partum to 3 weeks post-partum (Grummer, 1995, Drackley, 1999), as during this timeframe homeorhetic regulation of metabolic functions is necessary in order to accommodate parturition and lactogenesis (Bauman and Currie, 1980). In addition, it has recently been shown that nutritional management in the early dry period, i.e. after cessation of milking, is important for maintaining the health and productivity of transition cows (Dann et al., 2006). Dry matter intake (DMI) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (Hayirli et al., 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum, due to milk production, the demands for glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements (Bell, 1995).

For these reasons, the transition from late gestation to early lactation is a dynamic period for dairy cattle, during which most infectious and metabolic diseases are likely to occur (Goff and Horst, 1997, Mallard et al., 1998, Ingvartsen et al., 2003). Cows unable to adapt to this challenging time are more prone to negative subsequent events, and the associations between excessive NEB in dairy cows and these detrimental health effects have been presented by several authors (Andersson, 1988, Kehrli et al., 1989, Duffield, 2000, Hammon et al., 2006). The economic impacts of maladaptation are important and include increased risk of metabolic disease, reduced milk production, early removal from the herd, and poor reproductive performance.

This paper reviews testing of NEB-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (SCK), individual animal and herd consequences, treatment, and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to NEB in dairy cows. 
Negative energy balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to early lactation. It occurs because the energy demands for early lactation milk production cannot be completely met by feed intake. While NEB is a physiologically normal process, excessive NEB reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects after calving. Improved identification of cows with poor adaptation should be the goal on any dairy farm. While prevention of NEB is beyond the scope of this review, controlled-energy dry cow diets and feeding of monensin have been found to lessen NEB and help cows transition more smoothly into lactation.

Post-partum NEFA prevalence testing, while expensive and practically challenging, gives the best within-herd evaluation of NEB status. Herd prevalence testing for hyperketonemia allows a quick snapshot of NEB and should be repeated at least when changes in transition cow nutrition or management occur. If herd prevalence of hyperketonemia is high, accurate and timely identification of cows with hyperketonemia will allow for individual cow treatment interventions in order to decrease the risk of DA, culling, poor reproduction, and low milk yield. In order to accurately identify cows with hyperketonemia, incidence testing should be performed. Incidence testing of fresh cows with a cow-side blood BHBA meter allows for convenient testing with accurate results and will allow herds to decide which testing and treatment strategy will be most cost effective. Treatment of hyperketonemic cows with PG will decrease the risk of negative subsequent health events, improve reproduction, and, in some herds, will improve milk production, assuming that SCK is the primary limitation for these outcomes. For herds unwilling to test all fresh animals, testing could be focused on animals with high pre-calving NEFA concentrations (if available), cows of higher parity, and cows with calving difficulty.

4, Methods of measurement and implications of abnormal calcium concentrations in fresh dairy cows

Hypocalcemia is a prevalent disorder in the early postpartum period. Advances in periparturient nutrition and management strategies have decreased the occurrence of clinical hypocalcemia over the past few decades; however, subclinical hypocalcemia remains an important aspect of transition cow health. These proceedings will discuss the di¬ agnostic tools available to bovine practitioners for individual animal calcium concentration determination and herd-level monitoring, as well as current developments in the epidemiology of hypocalcemia and its prevention. One of the challenges in dairy cattle management is the maintenance of optimum blood calcium concentration during the early postpartum period. Postparturient hypocalcemia occurs due to the massive mobilization of calcium needed to initiate and sustain lactation. To maintain calcium concentrations at a level required for life (e.g., thermoregulation, muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum, cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone, decreases calcium excretion by the kidney, and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of calcium. Hypocalcemia results when serum calcium concentration falls faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation. Clinical hypocalcemia (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle.1 This disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum, ketosis, metritis, retained placenta, mastitis, culling, and decreased milk production.2-4 Traditionally, subclinical hypocalcemia (SCH] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration Traditionally, subclinical hypocalcemia (SCH] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration. Although clinical hypocalcemia is becoming a rare occurrence on modern dairy farms employing good nutritional management strategies, SCH is an often underdiagnosed problem at both the individual-animal and herd levels. Cur¬ rent research is under way to better define the epidemiology of hypocalcemia on today's large commercial herds with high-producing cows. Testing and monitoring options remain expensive although current studies to improve on farm, economically-viable testing methods are under way. Prevention of hypocalcemia through peripartum nutritional management is key. 

5, Herd-Level Monitoring and Prevention of Displaced Abomasum in Dairy Cattle

Displaced abomasum is a multifactorial disorder; for this reason, veterinarians should not monitor displace abomasum alone but in association with other diseases that can lead to its development.  Monitoring, prevention, and treatment of infectious and metabolic disorders characteristic of early lactation (eg, ketosis, retained placenta, metritis, mastitis, hypocalcemia) decreases the incidence of displaced abomasa on dairy farms.  When formulating diets to prevent displaced abomasa, several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber, maximization of dry matter intake, and limiting the energy density of the diet.  Facilities and cow comfort play a significant role in the development of displaced abomasum; for example, adequate stall design, heat abatement, bunk space, limiting pen moves, and separating animals from different parity groups.  Delivering a consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced abomasum prevention.

Displaced abomasum (DA) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left DA (LDA) side in cattle, with LDA being more frequently diagnosed than right DA. Abomasal displacement is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult dairy cows. In a nationwide survey, it was determined that the DA incidence in United States dairy herds was approximately 3.5%, with occurrence varying from 2.5% in herds with 500 or more cows to 4.8% in herds having fewer than 500 cows.1 Moreover, DA is known as an immediate postpartum condition with more than half of LDA cases being diagnosed within 2 weeks after parturition and 80% of the LDA cases occurring within the first month of lactation.2 Economic analyses have determined that the average cost per DA diagnosis is more than $700 when accounting for direct (eg, examination, correction, medication, discarded milk, death loss) and indirect (eg, future milk production loss, loss of body weight, decreased reproductive performance, increase risk of removal from the herd) costs.3 Assuming the 3.5% incidence reported by the US Department of Agriculture survey with the estimated 9 million dairy cows in United States, it is reasonable to approximate that the annual losses to the dairy industry from DA exceed 150 million dollars. Thus, monitoring and managing dairy herds to decrease the incidence of DA is of extreme importance for the sustainability of dairy production and to improve animal health and wellbeing. The diagnoses, medical therapy, methods for surgical correction, and posttreatment consequences of DA in an individual cow have been reported by various investigators.4–8 However, the evaluation and management of DA at the herd level have not been explored as consistently. Therefore, the objectives of this review article are to discuss the possible nutritional and nonnutritional factors involved in DA development and provide suggestions on evaluation and management strategies at the herd level to decrease its occurrence. 

DA is a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation dairy cows. Various components of cow health, including infectious and metabolic diseases, physical form and composition of diets during the transition period, and cow comfort, are factors linked to the pathogenesis of DA. It is important to understand how these factors play a role in the development of DA to establish herd-level strategies to monitor and reduce the occurrence of this clinical disorder. 

6, Production-related metabolic disorders of cattle: ketosis, milk fever and grass staggers

Ruminants differ from monogastrics because of the particularities of ruminal digestion of nutrients. Therefore, cattle are largely dependent on hepatic production of glucose from volatile fatty acids and other glucogenic precursors. Glucose demands can exceed the gluconeogenic capacity of the liver; for example, in the immediate postpartum period, when the need for glucose supply for lactose production rises quickly. At the same time, animals often show a substantial decrease in dry matter intake. To fulfil the glucose needs as well as other nutrient requirements, the physiological adaptation of the cow allows for alternative sources of energy and amino acids to be used that stem from adipose and muscle tissue breakdown. This homeorhetic adaptation is facilitated most importantly by low circulating concentrations of insulin and an uncoupling of the somatotropic axis (Bauman and Currie 1980, Bell 1995) that are typically observed in the postpartum period with subsequent catabolic effects in adipose and muscle tissue (Mann and others 2016a, c). Fatty acids from lipolysis and amino acids from proteolysis enter the liver and can undergo different metabolic fates. One of the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites, and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown, leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone, acetoacetate, ß-hydroxybutyrate [BHB]) and their release into the bloodstream. Ketone bodies serve as alternative energy sources and their increase during times of negative nutrient balance is physiological. However, when the increase in blood surpasses what is accepted as normal for the specific time period or stage of lactation, the animal enters a state of ketosis or more specifically hyperketonaemia (an abnormally high concentration of ketone bodies in the blood, commonly defined as BHB ≥ 1.2 mmol/l). Treatment options for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose, oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol, and ancillary treatments such as administration of B-vitamins, choline, and glucocorticoids. Randomised controlled trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (Fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment of hyperketonaemia. In several studies, oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis, as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder, such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (McArt and others 2011, McArt and others 2012a, Tatone and others 2016a, Gordon and others 2017). Although other treatments are commonly given, there is generally a lack of appropriately controlled studies for these (Gordon and others 2013), reducing the strength of evidence available to make treatment recommendations. Cows with postpartum ketosis have lower circulating concentrations of glucose than herdmates (Mann and others 2016b). More recently, we showed that intravenous glucose administration (Fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower BHB concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (Mann and others 2017). Cows showing clinical signs of the disease or having concentrations of BHB exceeding 3.0 mmol/l likely benefit from intravenous glucose administration. In our experience, commonly used doses of bolus infusion range from 250 to 500 ml of 40 to 50 per cent glucose (total of 125 to 250 g). We recently used a dose of 500 ml (250 g)in a randomised controlled study of 34 postpartum cows suffering from hyperketonemia, and did not document any detrimental consequences on intensively monitored parameters of metabolism when giving this bolus at the higher dose range over three days once per day (Mann and others 2017). To our knowledge, no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and production outcomes. Continuous intravenous infusion is not practical in most field situations, and may further decrease dry matter intake and is therefore not recommended. Use of glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone, as a general treatment strategy for ketosis remains controversial. One recent study showed possible beneficial effects of using dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in raising glucose and insulin concentrations and lower ing BHB concentrations in 31 ketotic cows with low feed intake and milk production postpartum (van der Drift and others 2015). In another large study including cows from 20 herds, the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (Seifi and others 2007). Treatment with dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher BHB concentrations in a study involving four herds (Tatone and others 2016a). Based on current literature, and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases, we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to ketosis treatment. 

Clinical hypocalcaemia, commonly referred to as milk fever, was first described in 1793, which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase milk production. Milk fever is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle, with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted for centuries. The enormous and immediate requirement of calcium (Ca) for colostrum and milk production, paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition, creates a large Ca deficit that takes days to rectify. Although a detailed discussion of Ca metabolism is beyond the scope of this article, multiple hormones and minerals are important for appropriate Ca regulation (Goff 2014); the amount of Ca located in various ‘pools’ within the cow is noted in Fig 3. To maintain Ca concentrations at a level required for life (eg, thermoregulation, muscle contraction) while transferring a large quantity to colostrum and milk, cows increase the secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of Ca from bone, decreases Ca excretion by the kidney, and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of Ca via vitamin D-dependent means. As sufficient magnesium (Mg) concentrations are required for proper interaction of parathyroid hormone with its receptor, adequate blood Mg concentration is also important for Ca regulation. Appropriate and timely coordination of these Ca regulation mediators is essential, as milk fever results when blood and extracellular Ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation, resulting in insufficient Ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency and death. The treatment for milk fever remains, for the most part, unchanged since its implementation in 1928. The standby therapy is slow intravenous administration of 500 ml of 23 per cent Ca gluconate or Ca borogluconate, which provides approximately 10.5 g of Ca. Blood Ca concentration increases rapidly with intravenous administration, peaking within 15 minutes of administration (Braun and others 2009). Subcutaneous administration is also acceptable for those unable to access a vein; however, time to peak Ca is extended to four hours (Blanc and others 2014, Domino and others 2017). The above treatment will provide the required Ca, and the cow will often stand within 30 minutes of administration. Although immediate therapy is imperative to prevent progression to death, it is important to note that additional Ca is required to counter the Ca deficit until the cow returns to normal feed intake. Intravenous and even subcutaneous Ca can result in a rebound hypocalcaemia 24 hours after administration (Box 1), and thus repeated administration of intravenous or subcutaneous Ca are counterproductive (Blanc and others 2014, Domino and others 2017). This results in cases of severe/recurrent hypocalcaemia wherein a cow has received multiple bottles of injectable Ca over the course of a few days but yet is still recumbent. Thus, oral Ca administration is the preferred route of Ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood Ca concentration. This can be given as a bolus (most commercial products contain between 40 to 60 g of Ca) or via an oral drench of 500 g Ca propionate (Table 2). However, we caution the administration of propionate in the first day or two after calving when cows often have high glucose concentrations, particularly immediately after calving (Vannucchi and others 2015, Ruoff and others 2017). Providing glucogenic precursors to a cow that is already hyperglycaemic is potentially harmful and can be appetite-supressing (G. Oetzel, personal communication; S. Borchardt, personal communication). Oral calcium products differ in their chemical composition and biological availability. The most common compositions include calcium chloride, calcium sulfate, and calcium carbonate, which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent, 70 per cent, and 50 per cent in dairy cattle, respectively.  (National Research Council 2001). We advise administration of one dose of oral Ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium, with a second of oral Ca dose given 12 to 24 hours later.

Extracellular Mg is essential for normal nerve conduction, muscle function, and bone mineral formation. However, most of the Mg of an animal is located outside of the extracellular fluids (Fig 3) and even though bone stores a significant proportion of the body’s Mg, it cannot be used in times of Mg deficit because bone resorption takes place in response to Ca status, not Mg. Therefore, maintenance of physiologic plasma Mg concentrations depends on continuous dietary Mg absorption. A detailed review of the mechanisms of Mg absorption is beyond the scope of this article and readers are referred to a recent review by Goff (2018). However, it is important that practitioners understand the two main mechanisms of Mg absorption. In adult ruminants, the reticulorumen is the main site for Mg absorption (Martens and Rayssiguier 1980, Martens and Gabel 1986). Table 3 summarises the factors affecting the absorption of Mg in the reticulorumen. In brief, when the active Mg transport mechanisms are blocked, such as with excessive dietary potassium, the use of soluble Mg sources can increase the ruminal concentration of Mg to levels that facilitate the passive absorption across the ruminal epithelium, thereby guaranteeing a sufficient Mg supply (Martens and Schweigel 2000)

Compared to hypocalcaemia and ketosis, fewer studies provide evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of the hypomagnesaemic cow. Considering the Mg deficit of a cow exhibiting hypomagnesaemic tetany, it is usually estimated that the immediate intravenous administration of 1.5 to 2.25 g of Mg is required to normalise blood Mg concentration (Goff 2004). Slowly injecting 0.5 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite, chloride, or borogluconate provide 1.5 to 4 g of Mg. The IV administration of solutions containing only Mg is discouraged as it increases the risk of respiratory and cardiac failure, which is reduced by the addition of Ca to the intravenous solutions (Goff 2009). In addition, most hypomagnesaemic cows also experience some degree of hypocalcaemia and will benefit from Ca administration. The clinical signs of tetany are observed because the decreased CSF Mg concentrations increase central neuronal excitability (Leaver and others 1987). Therefore, the clinical signs will not disappear until the CSF Mg concentration increases, usually about 1 hour after the IV administration of Mg because the blood-brain barrier decreases the diffusion of Mg. During this time, it is important not to stimulate the animals to rise in order to avoid the initiation of a tetany episode. Relapses are common, and cows should receive further treatment within 12 hours. Several options are available to reduce the rate of relapses (Table 4). As mentioned, cows experiencing tetany require immediate treatment. In cases where veterinary examination and treatment needs to be delayed and the owner is not comfortable undertaking an IV infusion, a magnesium enema (Box 2) is a quick and safe alternative. This will rise the serum concentration of Mg until the veterinarian can examine and treat the animal further. The treatment of these animals can be challenging because the insertion of the intravenous needle can initiate clonic convulsions that may injure the veterinarian and/or the animal. Hence, the use of sedatives (eg, xylazine) administered intramuscularly can decrease this risk of injury. The intravenous administration of tranquilizers has been associated with sudden hypotension and death and should therefore be avoided (Goff 2004).

6, Improving Energy Supply to Late Gestation and Early Postpartum Dairy Cows

Sixty-five multiparous Holstein cows were used to test the effects of feeding diets of varied ruminal carbohydrate availability during the transition period on dry matter intake, blood metabolites, and lactational performance. Cows received total mixed rations containing either cracked corn or steam-flaked corn beginning 28 d prior to expected calving date. At parturition, cows were assigned to a postpartum total mixed ration that contained either cracked corn or steam-flaked corn. Diets were fed until 63 d in milk. No treatment effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake, body weight, and body condition score were observed. Cows fed steam-flaked corn had lower blood urea N concentrations during the prepartum period and lower plasma nonesterified fatty acid concentrations during the prepartum and postpartum periods. Cows fed steam-flaked corn postpartum produced 2.3 kg/d more milk than cows fed cracked corn during the first 63 d in milk. Fat corrected milk showed no treatment effect. Seven cows were used to evaluate treatment effects on ruminal fermentation and digesta kinetics. Prepartum and postpartum treatments had minimal effects on ruminal fermentation. Feeding steam-flaked corn prepartum decreased apparent fiber digestibility and ruminal NH3 N. Feeding steam-flaked corn postpartum decreased the acetate to propionate ratio. Prepartum and postpartum treatments did not affect digesta kinetics. An increase in ruminal carbohydrate availability during the postpartum period enhanced milk production, but had variable results on ruminal fermentation.

Feeding diets with higher ruminally available carbohydrates to transition cows with high genetic potential for milk yield may be advantageous. Cows fed a TMR with SFC during the last 4 wk of gestation consumed more energy than cows fed a TMR with CC. The increased energy intake resulted in less mobilization of adipose tissue as parturition approached and lowered plasma NEFA concentrations. Cows fed a TMR with SFC during the postpartum period consumed more energy and produced more milk with lower fat and MUN contents than cows fed CC. Feeding SFC postpartum also reduced NEFA concentrations. The amount of ruminally available carbohydrate in prepartum or postpartum diets did not affect ruminal pH, volume, turnover rates, or turnover times. However, there were trends during the postpartum period for increased propionate concentrations and a decreased acetate: propionate ratio when SFC was fed. Thus, feeding diets with higher ruminal carbohydrate availability during the transition period may have benefits on animal health and productivity.

7, Physiological and pathological adaptations in dairy cows that may increase susceptibility to periparturient diseases and disorders

Dairy cows undergo tremendous metabolic and physiological adaptations around parturition to support lactation. The liver is central to many of these processes, including gluconeogenesis and metabolism of fatty acids mobilized from adipose tissue. Fat accumulation may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis, which in turn may predispose cows to other metabolic abnormalities. Several aspects of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations, affect dry matter intake, and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient health problems. Overfeeding energy during the dry period is a prominent risk factor. Considerable progress has been made in recent years in describing the adaptive changes in the liver and other organs in normal and abnormal states, but this knowledge has not yet identified unequivocally the key steps that might be compromised during development of metabolic disorders. The potential role of signaling compounds, such as the inflammatory cytokines released in response to environmental stressors, infectious challenge, and oxidative stress, in the pathogenesis of periparturient disease is under investigation. New techniques such as functional genomics, using cDNA or oligonucleotide microarrays, as well as proteomics and metabolomics, provide additional high throughput tools to determine the effects of nutrition, management, or stressors on tissue function in development of disease. Integrative approaches should be fruitful in unraveling the complex interactions of metabolism, immune activation, stress physiology, and endocrinology that likely underlie development of periparturient disease.

Dairy cows undergo tremendous adaptive changes during the transition from late gestation to early lactation. The importance of the periparturient period in determining health, productivity, and profitability has been underscored by the intense interest in nutrition and management of dairy cows during the transition period over the last two decades. The fundamental basis of these physiological changes is to ensure provision of adequate nutrients for the calf, both prenatally and postnatally. Dairy production has capitalized on this metabolic drive by selecting for higher and higher milk production. As a result, the magnitude of metabolic challenge faced by modern dairy cows at parturition is staggering. As demonstrated in Table 1, requirements for net energy of lactation (NEL) essentially double overnight as cows undergo parturition and commence lactation. The fact that many cows are able to meet this challenge without difficulty implies that the metabolic adaptations necessary to support high milk production are a component of the genetic factors that accompany selection for high milk production. However, the fact that, on average, roughly one in every two to three cows calving succumbs to some health problem during the transition period (e.g., Jordan and Fourdraine, 1993; Duffield et al., 2002) underscores the fragility of the system. Hansen (2000) suggested that continued selection for high milk production along with concurrent selection for larger mature size and more angular appearance may have increased the susceptibility to digestive and metabolic disorders such as displaced abomasum and ketosis. Regardless, the continued struggle with periparturient disease highlights the need for improvements in management to allow cows to achieve their genetic potential for milk production without jeopardizing their health (and the profitability of dairy producers). An improved mechanistic understanding of both physiological and pathological changes during the periparturient period may facilitate development of better feeding and management strategies. Physiological and pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis, displaced abomasum, and retained placenta (Duffield et al., 2002), and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (Dohoo and Martin, 1984; Kremer et al., 1993). The focus of this paper is on potential physiological and pathological mechanisms related to energy metabolism that may cause or predispose cows to periparturient disease. Many comprehensive reviews on various aspects of transition cow biology and management are available for more information (e.g., Bell, 1995; Grummer, 1993, 1995; Goff and Horst, 1997; Drackley, 1999; Bell et al., 2000; Ingvartsen and Andersen, 2000; Drackley et al., 2001; Ingvartsen et al., 2003; Jorritsma et al., 2003; Overton and Waldron, 2004). Emphasis here will be placed on recent investigations in our laboratory and on hypotheses that may be worthy of future investigation. As stated before (Drackley et al., 2001; Drackley, 2005), continued progress in this area will depend on multidisciplinary efforts encompassing nutrition and metabolism, endocrinology, immunology, and stress physiology. 
It is not the focus of this paper to review various nutritional management strategies for periparturient cows. Nevertheless, a few comments on various aspects of this topic in relation to the periparturient physological or pathophysiological changes are warranted. Although it is unlikely that dry period nutrition per se causes metabolic disorders, certain nutritional factors certainly appear to predispose cows to health problems. Close-up groups and diets The close-up or pre-calving diet approach is today’s version of the “steam-up diet”, a concept that has been in existence since at least 1928 (Boutflour, 1928). It seems logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets, especially when fed as total mixed rations (TMR), should help maintain DMI around calving and promote more rapid increases in DMI after calving, with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders. The general concept of diet changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to cows during the first few weeks after dry-off to the higher nutrient density required for postpartal cows. Because DMI of cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 d before calving, it has been assumed that increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total DMI. The typical decrease in DMI before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and NEL by about 2 percentage units and 0.84 MJ/kg of DM, respectively, in the pre-calving diet. Current interest and support for the close-up diet of higher nutrient density (i.e., more cereal grains and less forage) stems from an elegant experiment by Bertics et al. (1992). In that experiment, researchers prevented the normal drop in DMI by force-feeding the refusals into one group of cows fitted with ruminal cannulas. The diet was a 50:50 mixture (DM basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage, supplemented with vitamins and minerals. Force-fed cows had greater plasma glucose concentrations 2 d before calving, less liver TG accumulation at 1 d after calving, and tended (P < 0.11) to produce more 3.5% fat-corrected milk (46.1 vs. 41.7 kg/d) during the first 28 d of lactation. Of interest, however, is that by d 14 after calving, force-fed cows had greater plasma NEFA concentrations and by d 28 had similar liver TG concentrations. While implementation of close-up diets has been adopted enthusiastically by the dairy industry in the North America, surprisingly few data are available to support their actual effectiveness in decreasing the incidence of health problems or increasing milk yield. VandeHaar et al. (1999) fed close-up diets with energy densities of 5.4, 6.1, and 6.7 MJ/kg to cows during the last 28 d before calving. While prepartum DMI tended (P < 0.11) to be increased by about 1.5 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density, there was no difference in postpartum DMI, milk production, energy balance, or loss in body condition. Although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data, the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5). Other studies have shown no differences in postpartum responses to widely differing nutrient intakes during the close-up period (Dewhurst et al., 2000; Holcomb et al., 2001; Agenäs et al., 2003). Close-up diets seem to have proven beneficial in the field in many situations. However, the aspects associated with the improved management of a group of close-up cows may be more important than the particular diet that is fed. Regardless, producers should be cautioned not to extend feeding of the close-up diet too long. Overfeeding high-starch rations (high in corn silage and grains) during the entire dry period is detrimental to cow performance and metabolic responses. Our own research (Douglas, 2002; Dann et al., 2003a,b; Douglas et al., 2006) as well as research from others (Holtenius et al., 2003) indicates that this appears to be true even if cows are not visibly overconditioned, which is well known to be detrimental (Fronk et al., 1980; Van den Top et al., 1995). Evidence is accumulating that increasing nutrient density of the pre-calving diet by addition of cereals actually may increase the precalving decline in DMI (Rabelo et al., 2003; Grummer et al., 2004). Non-nutritional components of a good close-up program may be as important, or more important, than specific nutritional strategies. The importance of low-stress and comfortable environments for transition cows is discussed below. The questionable nutritional impact of the close-up group has been underscored again by a recent experiment from our laboratory, in which cows (n = 36 to 38 per group) had essentially equal DMI and milk production after calving when fed the same closeup diet at either ad libitum intake or in restricted amounts sufficient for only 80% of calculated precalving NEL requirements (Dann et al., 2003b). Dry matter intake Regulation of DMI during the periparturient period is complex and largely not understood (Ingvartsen and Andersen, 2000; Grummer et al., 2004). Based on high correlations between DMI 1 d before calving and DMI at 21 d after calving (Grummer, 1995), a major focus on maximizing prepartum DMI has developed in the field. Given the lack of significant differences, or in fact even improvements in postpartum DMI for cows that were restricted-fed (Agenäs et al., 2003; Douglas et al., 2006) or limit-fed (Holcomb et al., 2001) during the dry period, this relationship may have been overemphasized or misinterpreted. Relationships between prepartum and postpartum DMI and the accumulation of lipid in the liver after calving were analyzed (Drackley, 2003) using cows from a previous data set (Douglas, 2002; Douglas et al., 2004, 2006). Our hypothesis was that the change in DMI before calving was more highly related to postpartum DMI and fat accumulation in the liver than to the absolute DMI. In that analysis (Drackley, 2003), DMI for wk 3 postpartum was not correlated with DMI prepartum, but DMI for wk 1 postpartum was correlated with DMI for wk –1 (r = 0.44, P < 0.01). In contrast, DMI for wk 3 postpartum was correlated (P < 0.01) with percentage changes in DMI during the last 3 wk (r = 0.43) or last 2 wk (r = 0.41) prepartum. The DMI for wk 1 postpartum was correlated (P < 0.01) with percent changes in DMI during the last 3 wk (r = 0.34), last 2 wk (r = 0.49), or last week (r = 0.39) prepartum. Contents of total lipid and TG in liver at d 1 postpartum were negatively related to decreases in DMI during the last 3 wk (r= –0.63 and –0.63), last 2 wk (r= –0.67 and –0.65), and last 1 wk (r = –0.42 and –0.38) prepartum (Figure 2). Thus, it appears that changes in DMI prepartum, and not the absolute DMI per se, are more highly related to poor intakes and fatty livers after calving. Similar conclusions have been drawn by others (Grummer et al., 2004). These data emphasize the importance of good management that maintains cows healthy and comfortable before calving. In this way, high DMI may be more of an indicator of the overall comfort and well-being of the close-up cows rather than a cause for its success. Dietary carbohydrates Adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function, prevent displaced abomasum, and achieve high DMI. On the other hand, excessive NDF content may limit intake. Cows during the last 3 wk before calving seem to consume no more than about 0.8 to 0.9% of their body weight as NDF (J.K. Drackley, unpublished data). Sufficient nonfiber carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression of ketogenesis. Considerable emphasis has been placed in recent years on increasing the starch content of close-up or pre-fresh groups (Grummer, 1995; Minor et al., 1998; VandeHaar et al., 1999). Starches promote relatively greater ruminal production of propionate, which triggers insulin release that may restrain body fat mobilization. Increasing starch also tends to improve total DMI, diet digestibility, and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (Grummer, 1995), at least over the short-term in the close-up diet. Another proposed benefit of additional grains in the prepartum diet is to adapt the ruminal tissues and the rumen microbial population to the type of diet that will be fed after calving (Goff and Horst, 1997). Grain feeding increases length of the rumen papillae in comparison to feeding only poorly digestible roughages (Dirksen et al., 1985). It has been proposed that rumen papillae elongate in the presence of increased concentrations of volatile fatty acids, thereby increasing the absorptive surface in the rumen and helping to prevent acidosis after calving. However, recent research has indicated that this likely is not a large factor in transition success of cows fed more typical close-up diets (Andersen et al., 1999; Ingvartsen et al., 2001; Reynolds et al., 2004). Use of a prepartum “VFA load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered VFA concentrations and pH in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (Andersen et al., 1999) and did not positively affect DMI or milk production postpartum (Ingvartsen et al., 2001). Other methods exist to increase energy intake by pre-fresh cows. Simply using higher quality forages can have a major impact on ration energy density. High-fiber by-product feeds such as soybean hulls, beet pulp, corn gluten feed, and wheat middlings that are highly digestible also can improve total energy intake. While fermentation of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen, greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for glucose production. Relative effects of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of current research. For example, precalving diets based on either high starch or high fibrous byproducts showed few differences in postpartum performance (Smith et al., 2005). Maintenance of a healthy forage fiber mat to stimulate rumination and minimize potential for acidosis may be of large importance during the peripartal period. Dietary fat Because of its high energy density, supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving, but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the transition period. A summary of research indicated that fat supplementation during early lactation decreased DMI by an average of 0.3 kg/day but the response was variable among studies (Chilliard, 1993). While rumen-inert fat supplements often increase milk production for early lactation cows and may improve subsequent reproductive performance (Staples et al., 1998), fat supplementation does not seem to increase milk yield until after the first few weeks of lactation (Grummer, 1995). Furthermore, supplemental fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation (Chilliard, 1993). Therefore, additional long-chain fatty acids provided in the diet may further imbalance the relative proportions of glucogenic and ketogenic metabolites available to the cow during the periparturient period (Drackley, 1999; Ingvartsen et al., 2003). Consequently, fat supplementation in the early postpartum diet is not recommended if early postpartum cows can be grouped separately and fed a separate diet containing no supplemental fat. Our research group has been interested in the potential use of supplemental fat during the dry period to restore body condition to thin cows and as a possible metabolism modifier. While dietary fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (Grum et al., 1996; Douglas et al., 2004, 2006), the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (Douglas et al., 2004). Other studies in which supplemental fat was fed at more typical levels before calving also show no responses in DMI or milk production (Skaar et al., 1989; Allen et al., 1995; Salfer et al., 1995; Burhans and Bell, 1998). These results stand in contrast to the documented benefits of fat supplementation, particularly of rumen-inert fats, during established lactation (Staples et al., 1998). The discrepancy, as discussed above, likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively, but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period (Drackley, 1999). The potential remains for appropriate fat supplementation strategies to manipulate liver metabolism. In particular, supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to the intestine might be beneficial. In a recently reported commercial field trial (Sanchez et al., 2003), cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (P < 0.10) for fewer incidents of milk fever, displaced abomasum, mastitis, and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of palm oil. Hepatic phospholipids and TG can be enriched with PUFA if intestinal supply is increased. For example, we (Douglas et al., 2002) infused soybean oil into the abomasum of cows for 40 d before expected parturition. Concentrations of linoleic acid in hepatic phospholipids at d 1 postpartum were more than doubled relative to controls or cows administered saturated fatty acids. Body condition and energy intake Dairy cows, like other mammals, undergo a normal cycle of body energy storage and mobilization, with increased body fat storage during mid-gestation and increased body fat mobilization during early lactation. Over the long term, dairy cows appear to strive to maintain some normal degree of body fatness (Friggens, 2003). Evidence for this phenomenon includes the classic study by Garnsworthy and Topps (1982) and our own recent data (Douglas et al., 2006), showing that cows that are forced away from their desired body condition (either fatter or thinner) before calving eventually converge to a similar body condition score by 4 to 8 wk after calving. Management systems must recognize this basic phenomenon, and not try to circumvent the genetically programmed metabolic patterns during the lactation cycle. However, management or environmental circumstances that force cows away from their optimal body condition (i.e., too thin, too fat) may result in increased risk for health problems (Ingvartsen et al., 2003). It is well known that overconditioned cows (>4.0 on a 5-point scale) are at greater risk for development of metabolic problems (Morrow, 1976; Fronk et al., 1980; Reid et al., 1986; Van den Top et al., 1995; Smith et al., 1997). Overconditioned cows have poorer DMI after calving (Fronk et al., 1980; Bines and Morant, 1983) and readily break down their excessive stores of body fat (Reid et al., 1986; Rukkwamsuk et al., 1998). Overconditioned cows lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows, suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (Reid et al., 1986). Obesity leads to increased susceptibility to the complex of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases known as the "fat cow syndrome" (Morrow, 1976). Overconditioning results in impairment of the immune system (Lacetera et al., 2005) and also results in greater indices of oxidative stress (Bernabucci et al., 2005). Assuming that management of post-parturient cows is satisfactory, a thinner cow should have a better appetite after calving than a heavier cow. In the experiment from our laboratory mentioned earlier (Douglas, 2002; Douglas et al., 2006), we fed two diets during the dry period either at ad libitum intake or at restricted intake. Cows were housed individually in tiestalls during the dry period. Diets contained the same calculated energy density (NEL of 6 MJ/kg) and were either high fat (4% of DM) or control. Cows fed ad libitum consumed about 157% of NRC (1989) NEL requirements for dry cows and restricted cows were offered only enough feed to meet 80% of NRC recommendations. Body condition score at dry-off averaged about 3.0 (5-point scale). Cows fed either ration ad libitum gained about 0.2 body condition score units during the dry period, whereas restricted cows lost about 0.5 body condition units from dry-off to calving. Cows fed either ration in restricted amounts had less TG in liver on d 1 after calving, and had faster rates of DMI increase after calving. Cows fed for ad libitum intake during the dry period produced about 2 kg/d less than restricted-fed cows (not significant). Of interest is that cows in both ad libitum and restricted groups reached the same body condition by about 5 wk after calving. Results of this experiment indicated that under our controlled conditions, there was no advantage to feeding higher-energy diets during the dry period to try to add body condition to cows in moderately thin body condition going into the dry period. Earlier research also supports this concept (Kunz et al., 1985). The current working hypothesis under investigation in our laboratory is that extended periods of feeding diets high in starch and/or total energy to dairy cows during late gestation induce changes analogous to insulin resistance in other species, even in the absence of visible overconditioning. In support of this hypothesis, we recently fed cows either a moderate energy diet or a low-energy diet for ad libitum intake during the first 5 wk of the dry period (Dann et al., 2003a; Dann, 2004). Cows fed the high energy diet had about 2.5 times the insulin concentrations as cows fed to meet NRC (2001) energy requirements during the dry period, with similar glucose concentrations and serum NEFA that were suppressed only by 29%. During the closeup period (3 wk before parturition), cows that previously had overconsumed energy during the far-off dry period had greater NEFA concentrations (323 vs. 230 µmol/L) than cows previously fed to meet energy requirements. Holtenius et al. (2003) reported that cows fed a higher energy allowance during the dry period had a greater degree of insulin resistance before and after calving, which allowed greater NEFA concentrations. In contrast, cows that were limit-fed under requirements had lower NEFA concentrations in the periparturient period, similar to results of Douglas et al. (2006). Earlier Holtenius et al. (2000) reported that elevated glucose concentrations, such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance, had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for abomasal displacement. In our experiments, liver slices from overfed cows had a lower capacity for oxidation of fatty acids, and greater esterification capacity, compared with cows fed the lower energy diet (Litherland et al., 2003). In addition, microarray analysis of gene expression patterns revealed extensive differences in hepatic gene expression between overfed and underfed cows (Loor et al., 2004). To fully interpret these studies, data are needed on whether overfeeding energy during late gestation may result in preferential accumulation of fat in internal fat depots. 

8, New Concepts in Nutritional Management of Dry Cows

Dry cow nutrition has been an active area of research over the last half-century. In particular, the last two decades have seen intensive interest in management of cows during the so-called “close-up” or “transition” period, generally considered to be about the last 21 days before calving through 21 days after calving (Grummer, 1995). The intense research effort has resulted in better understanding of the biology of cows during this turbulent period, and some insight into how to feed cows during the close-up dry period. However, the lack of repeatable success with close-up dry period nutrition programs in decreasing the occurrence of health disorders and increasing subsequent milk production has been frustrating and problematic to farmers, nutritionists, and researchers (Drackley, 1999). It has been said that “there is very little new under the sun”. Indeed, many ideas and practices cycle in and out of popularity, with new applications or new subtleties. The “new concepts” to be discussed in this paper fall into that category. Interest in low energy, high forage diets for cows during the dry period has been renewed in the last two to three years. Systems being implemented include high-straw, one-group total-mixed rations (TMR) for the entire dry period; lower inclusion rates of straw with other forages in one- or two-group systems; use of high-fiber by-product feeds to lower starch content; and a variety of other combinations and modifications. Our research group is extremely interested in the potential of these approaches to decrease calving-related health problems. Field application and testing of 1 different approaches has provided insight as well, but there is much we need to learn yet. The objective of this article is to summarize the current research base and provide some recommendations based on research and field experiences. For the last 10 to 15 years, research has focused on effects of nutritional management during the “close-up” or “pre-fresh” group to decrease incidence of health problems in fresh cows and to allow higher milk production at peak. Much of the emphasis has been on maximizing pre-calving energy intake by 2 pushing for higher dry matter intakes (DMI) and increasing diet energy density through greater rates of concentrate feeding. The close-up diet approach is today’s version of the “steam-up diet”, a concept that has been in existence since at least 1928 (Boutflour, 1928). It seems logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets, especially when fed as a total mixed ration (TMR), should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving, with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders. The general concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for fresh cows. Because DMI of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving, increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total feed intake. The typical decrease in DMI before calving results in the need to increase contents of crude protein and NEL by about 2 percentage units and 0.20 Mcal/kg of DM, respectively, in the close-up diet. Interest in and support for the close-up diet of higher nutrient density (i.e., more cereal grains and less forage) stems from an elegant experiment by Bertics et al. (1992). In that experiment, researchers prevented the normal drop in DMI by force-feeding the refusals into one group of cows fitted with ruminal cannulas. The diet was a 50:50 mixture (DM basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage, supplemented with vitamins and minerals. Force-fed cows had greater plasma glucose concentrations 2 d before calving and less liver triglyceride accumulation at 1 d after calving and tended (P < 0.11) to produce more 3.5% fat-corrected milk (46.1 vs. 41.7 kg/d) during the first 28 d of lactation. Of interest, however, is that by d 14 after calving, force-fed cows had greater plasma NEFA concentrations and by d 28 had similar liver triglyceride concentrations. While higher-energy close-up diets were implemented enthusiastically by the dairy industry in the US, surprisingly few data are available to support their actual effectiveness in decreasing the incidence of health problems or increasing milk yield. A summary of research conducted on this approach worldwide provides a disappointing view of its potential to improve subsequent DMI and milk production. Health outcomes across studies also provide little evidence for marked improvement. For example, VandeHaar et al. (1999) fed close-up diets with energy densities of 1.30, 1.49, and 1.61 Mcal/kg to cows during the last 28 d before calving. While prepartum DMI tended (P < 0.11) to be increased by about 1.5 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density, there was no difference in postpartum DMI, milk production, energy balance, or loss in body condition. Although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data, the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5). Other studies have shown 3 no differences in postpartum responses to widely differing nutrient intakes during the close-up period (e.g., Kunz et al., 1985; Dewhurst et al., 2000; Holcomb et al., 2001; Agenas et al., 2003; Rabelo et al., 2003). Field experiences have been varied; in some cases, changes in close-diets have resulted in apparent improvements in health or productivity, but in other cases results have been frustrating (Drehmann, 2000). In many cases, the aspects associated with the management of a group of close-up cows have become more important than the particular diet that is fed. Recent observational data from the University of Wisconsin (Nordlund and Oetzel, unpublished) on effects of pen changes and stocking density are particularly exciting in that regard. When producers are struggling with transition-related health problems and the close-up management program is addressed, often more than just diet is changed. Management changes in housing, group size and movement, water availability, and post-fresh monitoring may be as important (or more important) in transition success as the diet itself.

9, New Approaches to Feeding Dry Cows

Interest has surged recently in use of highstraw low-energy diets for dry cows. When implemented correctly, these diets have been successful in decreasing incidences of peripartal health disorders. These diets may work by controlling overall energy intake by cows and thereby prevent metabolic changes similar to those that develop in fat cows. By formulating high-bulk TMR that will limit total energy intake but provide adequate amounts of protein and other nutrients, cows can be allowed to consume feed ad libitum and meet their requirements, while preventing overconsumption of energy. Guidelines for formulating these rations are discussed, including the need to carefully interpret calculated energy values. Equally as important as diet formulation, however, is feeding management. Cows must not be able to sort the ration, and adequate bunk space must be available. Although other low-energy ingredients might also be usable to dilute the energy of corn silage and other higher-energy feeds, no comparative data are available. Research to evaluate additional ingredient options is needed.

Dairy operations, large and small, continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases around calving. Turbulent transitions increase health care expenses, decrease milk production, impair reproductive performance, and result in premature culling or death. Farm profitability and animal well-being both suffer. Despite many years of research and field emphasis, practical management strategies to minimize health problems while still promoting high milk production have remained elusive. Over the last 20 years, it has become common practice to feed rations of higher energy and nutrient density during the close-up (pre-fresh) period, generally beginning around 3 weeks before expected calving. This approach was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving, decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver, and control blood calcium concentrations. Although each of these ideas by themselves were sound and based on good research data, the ability of higher-energy close-up or “steamup” diets to minimize production diseases in research trials and field experience has been disappointing and frustrating. Overall, research data fail to demonstrate that steam-up diets reliably and repeatedly improve production, body condition, reproduction, or health after calving.

High-straw, low-energy rations are exciting for their potential to markedly improve health during the transition period. The key concept is to strive to meet the requirements of cows for energy and all other nutrients but to not allow cows to exceed their requirements for energy by consuming large amounts for the duration of the dry period. Provided that these high-straw, low-energy rations are formulated, mixed, and delivered properly, results have been positive. Research and field observations indicate that the rations result in better energy balance after calving, with subsequent improvements in health. Milk production is maintained, and field observations suggest that reproductive success also may be improved, although data are lacking. Research is needed to explore other low-energy bulky ingredients as options to straw. 

10, The Effect of Prepartum Injection of Vitamin E on Health in Transition Dairy Cows

The objective of this study was to investigate parenteral vitamin E for the prevention of peripartum disease in dairy cows. A randomized clinical trial was conducted in 21 commercial dairy herds. Cows (n = 1142) were randomly assigned to receive either a single subcutaneous injection of 3000 IU of vitamin E, or placebo, 1 wk before expected calving. Serum αtocopherol was significantly increased in treated cows at 7 and 14 d, but not at 21 d after injection. Overall, there were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta, clinical mastitis, metritis, endometritis, ketosis, displaced abomasum, or lameness. However, there was a conditional benefit of treatment for reduction of the incidence of retained placenta. Cows with marginal pretreatment vitamin E status (serum α-tocopherol to cholesterol mass ratio < 2.5 × 10-3) that received an injection of vitamin E tended to have reduced risk of retained placenta. However, in cows with adequate serum vitamin E, there was no reduction in the incidence of any disease. For clinical application, primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin E.

11, Metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
A retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA), β-hydroxybutyrate (BHBA), glucose and calcium (Ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (DA), clinical ketosis and culling in Holstein cows. Eight hundred and forty-nine cows from 16 farms were sampled weekly for the first 3 weeks post-partum. The cows were under clinical observation from calving until 60 days in milk (DIM) and during this time there were 22 cases of DA, 31 cases of clinical ketosis and 39 cows were culled.

Elevated concentrations of BHBA were associated with DA, clinical ketosis and culling. In the first week after calving, cows with serum BHBA ⩾ 1000 μmol/L had 13.6 times greater odds of developing DA than cows with lower values. Serum NEFA and BHBA concentrations during week 1 were associated with the subsequent occurrence of clinical ketosis. The odds of clinical ketosis were 6.3 times greater in cows with serum NEFA ⩾ 1.0 mmol/L in the first week after calving. In addition, cows with BHBA ⩾ 1200 μmol/L in the first week after calving, were at 4.7 times greater risk of developing clinical ketosis. In the first and second weeks after calving the serum Ca concentration was associated with subsequent culling. In addition, cows with NEFA concentrations ⩾ 1.0 mmol/L were 3.6 times more likely to be culled within the following 2 months. The study indicated that early post-partum serum BHBA, NEFA and Ca concentrations have potential as indicators of disease and culling risk in dairy cows.

12, Evaluation of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

Objective—To identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables, as measured in the week before parturition, that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (RP) in dairy cows.

Design—Retrospective cohort study.

Animals—1,038 cows in 20 commercial dairy herds.

Procedures—Serum concentrations of fatty acids (FAs), β-hydroxybutyrate, cholesterol, glucose, urea, and calcium and blood leukocyte, neutrophil, lymphocyte, monocyte, and eosinophil counts were determined. These variables were evaluated for an association with development of RP by use of a multivariate logistic regression model. Parity, season of par-turition, existence of twins or dystocia, body condition score, and vitamin E treatment were included in the model as covariates.

Results—High serum concentrations of cholesterol and FAs were associated with an increased odds of RP. There was a 5% relative increase in the odds of RP for each 0.1 mmol/L increase in cholesterol or FAs concentration in the week before parturition. Season of parturition and twinning were also identified as risk factors.

Conclusions and Clinical Relevance—These associations indicated that prepartum energy metabolism contributes to the development of RP. Serum concentrations of cholesterol and FAs may be useful to identify cows with a metabolic abnormality or energy imbalance that might predispose them to RP and should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical risk factors such as twinning, dystocia, or parturient paresis.

12, Monitoring and Managing Energy Balance in the Transition Dairy Cow

Dairy cattle are at an increased risk for many diseases and disorders during early lactation (10). At this time, there is increasing milk production, but a lag in feed intake. This combination creates a negative energy balance. The animal attempts to supply the needs for milk production by drawing on body fat reserves. This release of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies, acetone, acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate (BHB) (11). These compounds are important as a source of energy when carbohydrate levels are reduced (2). However, the accumulation of these compounds can lead to ketosis (2). Ketosis has been shown to significantly reduce milk yield in dairy herds (12,13). There can be an average loss of production of 25% or 353.4kg per lactation (10,13) with clinical ketosis. Even with subclinical ketosis, there is a loss of 1-1.5kg/day of milk production (2). Clinical ketosis typically occurs within the first six to eight weeks post calving, and results in rapid loss of condition, decreased milk production, and hard dry feces (10). In addition, the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (BHB) and fatty acids. Occasionally, cows with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs, such as licking and blindness (11).

13, Minimizing Subclinical Metabolic Diseases in Dairy Cows

Most periparturient abnormalities have some metabolic element as a component of the cause of clinical disease. The metabolic disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum calcium concentrations. Negative energy balance, fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome, clinical ketosis, and abomasal displacement. A negative energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta, metritis, and mastitis through impaired immune function. A third category of metabolic disease in early lactation might include rumen acidosis, which is marked by low rumen pH. Thus, calcium homeostasis, energy balance, and rumen pH are important considerations for disease prevention in transition dairy cows (Goff and Horst, 1997).

In general, subclinical disease incidence is more common than clinical disease. Frequently it goes unnoticed and is associated with significant economic losses that include increased clinical disease risks, impaired milk production and reduced reproductive performance, and culling losses. Of the three major subclinical metabolic diseases, the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis, which is common and associated with significant economic loss. Prevention depends on several factors including proper transition cow nutrition and management and optimal body condition. The use of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol, and ionophores may also aid in the prevention of ketosis. It is commonly accepted that subclinical hypocalcemia is an important disease, but very little is published on the impact of this problem on subsequent risk of disease or production loss. Subacute rumen acidosis (SARA) is also thought to be a major problem on many dairies but is difficult to measure and very little controlled research exists for this syndrome. In addition, SARA is more likely to be a problem in component-fed rather than in TMR-fed transition cows. This article will focus primarily on the importance and prevention aspects of subclinical ketosis.

The reported prevalence of subclinical ketosis ranges widely. Reported prevalences for hyperketonemia in the first two months of lactation have ranged from 8.9 to 34% in various studies (Dohoo and Martin, 1984; Duffield et al, 1997). Duffield et al (1998) reported the cumulative incidence of subclinical ketosis over the first 9 weeks of lactation in 507 untreated cows from 25 Holstein dairy farms was 59% and 43% using cutoff threshold betahydroxybutyrate (BHBA) concentrations of 1200 and 1400 µmol/L respectively. It is difficult to compare these numbers across studies since numerous factors beyond cow and herd level risk influence the rates. The test characteristics (sensitivity and specificity) influence prevalence, as does the timing and intensity of sampling. Generally studies that measured rates with less sensitive milk tests report much lower prevalences than those using serum or urine. Dohoo and Martin (1984) found more positive milk ketone tests in the first versus the second month of lactation, and observed that the peak prevalence of hyperketonemia occurred in the third and fourth week of lactation. However, recent work suggests that there is an earlier peak that occurs in the first two weeks postcalving (Duffield et al, 1997). It may be that advances in genetics and feeding management have pushed the metabolic challenge closer to calving. Alternatively, differences in peak occurrence for subclinical ketosis may reflect differences in etiology, with early lactation occurrence reflecting suboptimal dry cow management and expression of fatty liver, while later occurrences may indicate deficiencies in lactating cow management (Cook et al, 2001).

Subclinical hypocalcemia ranges in prevalence depending on the cutpoint chosen for defining it. Ranges of 20 to 40% subclinical hypocalcemia have been reported.  Association With Periparturient Disease Several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters, but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and periparturient disease. Although subclinical and clinical ketosis are both part of the same continuum, we can only assume the associations found for clinical ketosis would be the same for the subclinical condition. Subclinical ketosis as a risk factor for subsequent disease occurrence has been linked with clinical ketosis, abomasal displacement, metritis, mastitis, and cystic ovarian disease. The most consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis, clinical ketosis and displaced abomasum. Impaired immune function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells, are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis and mastitis. Dohoo and Martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four days later. However, the authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving, subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause of metritis. The relationship between displaced abomasum and ketosis has been identified as bi-directional. That is, ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead to ketosis. Correa et al (1993) found that ketosis increased the risk of abomasal displacement, but not the reverse. Dohoo & Martin (1984) could find no direct association between the two conditions. However, ketosis as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several recent papers. Elevated BHBA concentrations above 1000 μmol/L increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (Duffield, 1997; Geishauser et al, 1997, LeBlanc et al, 2005). Cows with concentrations of BHBA at or above1400 µmol/L in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement (Duffield, 1997). Few disease associations with subclinical hypocalcemia have been reported. One study (Massey et al, 1993) reported a nearly 5 fold increase in the risk of abomasal displacement (1997). However, this has not been observed in Canadian studies when other serum constituents, including ketones, have been evaluated (Geishauser et al, 1997; LeBlanc et al, 2005).

Impact On Milk Production And Milk Components In general there is consensus that a negative association between hyperketonemia and milk production exists, however there are conflicting reports. In one study, the loss of production associated with a positive milk ketone test was 1.0 to 1.4 kg of milk per day (Dohoo and Martin, 1984). This represented 4.4 to 6.0% of the mean test day milk production. In this study, both the milk samples and the milk weights were obtained on the same day, and thus milk ketone levels and milk production were evaluated concurrently. Test day milk production was negatively correlated with milk acetone levels in several Scandinavian projects. By contrast, Kauppinen (1984) showed a significant positive correlation between both the BHBA and acetoacetate concentrations in blood and milk yield. Kauppinen subsequently reported that subclinically ketotic cows had significantly higher annual milk yields than nonketotic cows. It is possible that higher milk yields put cows at increased risk of developing subclinical ketosis. Increased levels of milk production may be associated with increased fat mobilization and a greater risk of hyperketonemia. However, without objective measures for ketosis, the definition might vary widely in observational studies such as this. Regardless of the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia, the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of clinical ketosis. Assuming that higher producing cows are more likely to be hyperketonemic, a larger proportion of subclinically ketotic cows combined with misclassification bias of clinical ketosis cases could mute any association between clinical ketosis and previous lactation milk yield. Inverted milk curves in hyperketonemic cows were noted in a large Swedish study (Gustafsson et al, 1993). Most of the loss in milk production occurred in the first 100 days of lactation and amounted to 328 kg loss in fat corrected milk yield over 200 days. Recent studies support both the subclinical ketosis, clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on milk production. Milk yield was lower 2 to 4 weeks in one study (Rajala-Schultz et al, 1999) and 8 to 9 days in another study (Edwards and Tozer, 2004) prior to the diagnosis of clinical ketosis. Noticeable milk yield losses weeks prior to actual diagnosis is strong support for the negative and unrealised impact of subclinical ketosis on milk production. Milk fat and milk protein are significantly altered in hyperketonemia. Milk fat percentage was increased in subclinically ketotic cows (Miettenen, 1994). Mean annual milk fat yield was significantly higher in both subclinically ketotic and clinically ketotic cows compared to normal cows (Kauppinen, 1984). The association between milk fat and hyperketonemia is, presumably, because of increased availability of BHBA and fatty acids for milk fat synthesis. It is unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat, or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to subclinical ketosis. Milk protein percent has been reported to be lower in cows with subclinical ketosis (Miettenan and Setala, 1993). This may be the result of a reduced energy supply, since milk protein percent is positively associated with net energy balance. Negative associations between subclinical hypocalcemia and milk production have not been reported, perhaps because higher previous lactation milk yield is a risk factor for the occurrence of milk fever.  Impact On Reproductive Performance There has been conflicting research findings on the impact of subclinical ketosis on reproductive performance. However recent work seems to be building a consensus that there is a negative impact. Significant correlations between the herd prevalence of hyperketonemia and herd mean intervals from both calving to first service and calving to last service have been noted but this is herd level data and doesn’t necessarily imply a cow-level association (Andersson, 1988). A link between subclinical ketosis and the increased incidence of cystic ovaries has been reported suggesting an impact on ovarian function (Dohoo and Martin, 1984). A significant inverse relationship between milk fat percentage and first insemination pregnancy rates has also been identified (Kristula et al, 1995). Miettenen and Setala (1993) found an increased interval from calving to conception in cows with high milk yield and high fat yield. Whitaker et al (1993) found cows with a better energy status at 14 days postpartum had a reduced interval from calving to the onset of cyclicity and fewer services per conception. No effect was observed when energy status was evaluated at 21 days postpartum or at first service. This study was only conducted on 24 cows within one herd. More recently, however, studies with larger numbers of cows have also identified some negative impacts of subclinical ketosis on fertility. Walsh et al (2004) have reported that 1st service conception rate was decreased by 50% in cows with serum BHBA concentrations ≥ 1400 umol/L in the 2nd week postcalving, based on 869 cows having at least one breeding postcalving. In addition, the odds ratio decreased from 0.7 at 1100 umol/L BHBA to 0.31 at 1900 umol/L BHBA, implying in a sense a dose effect of ketone concentration. Koller et al (2003) found increased concentrations of ketone bodies in the first 6 weeks post calving delayed conception.  Culling The influence of subclinical ketosis on the risk of culling has not been well described. Culling may be more likely because of impaired health, reduced production and potentially impaired reproductive performance. Clinical ketosis increased the risk of culling both early in lactation and late in lactation (Grohn et al, 1998). Presumably the early lactation risk was associated with reduced.

production and increased disease risk, while the later culling association might be related to reduced reproductive performance. Cook et al (2001) reported an increased culling risk for ketotic cows measured through milk acetone in a 410 cow study. Both subclinical ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk of culling. Cows with serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 1.8 mmol/L and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 3.0 times and cows with serum BHBA concentrations above 1400 umol/L were 1.4 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation, after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (Duffield et al, 2005)  Thresholds For Defining Subclinical Disease Most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease are arbitrary. Many thresholds used for subclinical hypocalcemia and ketosis are based on reference values where the limit is set at above or below a 95% confidence interval. Since higher concentrations of ketone bodies and lower calcium concentrations are expected at calving and postpartum, arbitrarily assigning a threshold based on a best guess or data distribution runs the risk of just being on the higher or lower end of normal. Few studies have actually reported threshold concentrations based on either negative impacts on health, production, reproduction or culling. There is a lack of published studies that have established cutpoints in this way for subclinical hypocalcemia. Duffield et al (2005) recently reported a cutpoint of serum calcium ≤ 1.8 mmol/L in the week following calving was associated with a significant threefold increase in early lactation culling risk. Some research does exist for more defendable cutpoints for subclinical ketosis. Reist et al (2003) used milk acetone at 0.4 mmol/L and serum BHBA at 2300 umol/L and found significantly reduced milk yield at both cutpoints and increased the risk of endometritis at the milk acetone threshold. Duffield and Geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of BHBA at or above 1400 umol/L. Duffield (1997) also found a significant reduction in milk yield at first DHI test at 1800 umol/L BHBA, with a non-significant (P=0.13) reduction at 1600 umol/L. However, the increasing thresholds were associated with increasing reductions in milk yield. Leblanc et al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/L BHBA in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an abomasal displacement. Walsh et al (2004) have identified reductions in fertility starting at a cutpoint of 1100 umol/L and Duffield et al (2005) have identified increased culling risk at 1400 umol/L BHBA. Based on the above data, it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum BHBA should start at about 1400 umol/L.

General Guidelines Since ketosis occurs in early lactation, recommendations for prevention have focused on the nutritional management of the dry and transition cow. Detailed recommendations for nutrition during the dry period can be found elsewhere (Oetzel, 1998). It is a common recommendation to divide the dry period into two feeding groups: far-off and close-up (Radostits et al, 1994). Typically, far-off diets follow NRC guidelines for dry cows. The close-up diet is usually balanced according to recommendations that are halfway between the dry cow and early lactation cow and should be fed starting at least three weeks before expected calving (Oetzel, 1998). The goals of the transition diet (specifically designed to prevent subclinical ketosis) are to maximize dry matter intake and to provide adequate energy density (Oetzel, 1998). Avoidance of ketogenic feedstuffs and increased frequency of feeding concentrates have been advocated as preventive measures against subclinical ketosis. The reduction of overconditioning cows in late lactation and the early dry period, as well as lead feeding with concentrates about three weeks prior to calving have also been suggested as aids in prophylaxis (Andersson, 1988). Maximizing dry matter intake (DMI) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition cow program. Recent work at Guelph (Osborne, 2003) indicates that a DMI of less than 12 kg per cow per day in the last 3 weeks prior to calving substantially increases the subsequent risk of subclinical ketosis (Odds Ratio 5.7, p < 0.05). Achieving group DMI targets above an average of 12 kg per cow per day are possible and based on the above finding should be a goal for the close-up group. More important than ration formulation and ration ingredients, close attention should be paid to cow comfort and environmental issues. These factors include but are not limited to adequate pen space or stall space per cow, adequate feed bunk space, sufficient and comfortable bedding, adequate water supply and minimization of heat stress. Role of Feed Additives In addition to good nutrition, certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when administered prophylactically. Niacin fed prior to calving at the rate of 3 to 6 grams per day may be helpful in reducing blood levels of BHBA (Fronk and Schultz, 1979; Dufva et al, 1983). However, the first citation (Fronk and Schultz) contained no control group and the impact identified in the second study (Dufva) was only marginal. Propylene glycol has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (Emery et al, 1964; Sauer et al, 1973). Treatment of cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (Fisher et al, 1973). Precalving oral treatment with 300 g of propylene glycol per day for 10 days lowered serum non-esterified fatty acid (NEFA) concentrations and improved some measures of reproductive performance in one study (Formigoni et al, 1996). A dose of propylene glycol of 1L per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased BHBA, and NEFA and increased glucose concentrations (Studer et al, 1993). It appears that a bolus of propylene glycol is necessary for maximum effect, since mixing in a total mixed ration is not as efficacious as either an oral drench or when mixed with a small quantity of grain (Christenson et al, 1995). Propylene glycol requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (Sauer et al, 1989). Ionophores have been proposed as potential prophylactic agents for reducing hyperketonemia. In contrast to propylene glycol, ionophores are relatively inexpensive and much easier to administer. The gluconeogenic potential of monensin has attracted researchers to investigate its possible role as an antiketogenic agent in dairy cattle. Rogers and Hope-Cawdery (1980) first described the beneficial effects of monensin for reducing the incidence of ketosis in a herd with a clinical ketosis problem. The antiketogenic properties of monensin were later investigated in a Canadian trial involving two levels of monensin and three groups of 12 Holstein cows (Sauer et al, 1989). Monensin included at 30 grams per ton of total ration (high group), decreased the incidence of subclinical ketosis and significantly reduced blood BHBA levels in the first three weeks postpartum (Sauer et al, 1989). The incidence of subclinical ketosis, defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/L), was reduced by 50% and blood BHBA levels were reduced by 40% for the high monensin group. Based on the average feed intakes observed in this trial, the low monensin group received approximately 208 mg of monensin per day and the high group 399 mg per day. Green (1997) reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (CRC), which delivers 335 mg per day, significantly reduced the concentrations of BHBA and increased those of glucose. Monensin treatment in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 wk postcalving. Duffield et al (1998b) reported that monensin CRC administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence, prevalence, and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd field study. Monensin treatment also significantly reduced the concentrations of serum BHBA and aspartate aminotransferase, and increased the concentrations of serum glucose and urea (Duffield et al, 1998a). Stephenson et al (1997) conducted a small study involving 24 cows from 2 farms where monensin CRCs were administered 50 d precalving. A significant decrease in NEFA, BHBA and glucose was noted in the precalving period. No significant effects on these energy indicators were observed post calving. Duffield et al. ( 2003) also observed a significant precalving reduction in NEFA. Cows from the Stephenson study were also evaluated for their neutrophil function. Monensin significantly improved the chemotactic function of neutrophils (Stephenson et al, 1996), indicating that monensin may improve immune function indirectly via an improvement in energy status. Reductions in liver enzymes and improvements in energy indicators such increased glucose and lower NEFA and BHBA suggest a possible impact on liver function and health. Recently, monensin CRC treatment 3 wk prior to calving was found to significantly increase liver glycogen 3 wk postcalving (Zahra, 2004). The negative associations between subclinical ketosis, health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health and production. Administration of a monensin controlled release capsule precalving reduced the incidence of clinical ketosis by 50%, abomasal displacement by 40% and multiple illness by 40% (more than one disease) (Duffield et al, 1999b). The milk production response depended on body condition and was 0.85 kg/day at peak lactation in cows with a precalving BCS of 3.25 to 3.75, and was 1.2 kg/day for the first 90 days of lactation in fat cows (BCS 4.0)(Duffield et al, 1999a). No milk production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest BHBA concentrations and were at decreased risk of subclinical ketosis. A subsequent Canadian study conducted in 45 dairy herds confirmed that monensin CRC reduces the incidence of displaced abomasum (Duffield et al, 2002). A pooled summary of the two Canadian projects showed that monensin CRC reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by 40% each. In addition, the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated cows (P=0.09). Rumen protected choline has been shown to influence liver glycogen and triglyceride (Pipenbrink and Overton, 2003), but not in all studies (Zahra, 2004). A topdress of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect BHBA, NEFA, liver glycogen or liver triglyceride. However, milk production was significantly increased in choline treated cows and this effect was more pronounced in cows that were overconditioned. Approaches to reducing the prevalence of low serum calcium include reducing potassium in feedstuffs precalving and adding chlorinated supplements to the close-up diet. Although the latter is efficacious it needs to be closely monitored for efficacy through regular urine pH checking. If DMI is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference, metabolic problems may get worse rather than better. 

Subclinical ketosis is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases, lost milk production, reduced reproductive performance and increased culling risk. Estimates indicate it costs at least $78 US (Geishauser et al, 2001) (and probably closer to $350 CDN), which considered at the herd level, is considerably more than most clinical diseases, since subclinical disease is far more frequent. Cow-level risk factors are parity, body condition score and season of calving. Herd variation for this disease is wide and herd level risk factors are poorly described. However, herd level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management, feed quality and nutritional programs, cow comfort, environment, and other variables that influence dry matter intake. Prevention should therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry matter intake. Consideration should be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol and monensin.
