dairy operations large and small continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases .  based on the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase nfc in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to vfa to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer tmr to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed) and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the .  the main goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress .  strategies to prevent these diseases are therefore based on major factors directly or indirectly increasing the risk of fatty liver ketosis acidosis and displaced abomasum—factors such as over-conditioning at calving excessive mobilisation of body fat low nutrient intake nutrient or diet specific factors and management and .  logically reduction of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever ketosis metritis and retained placenta) will reduce the risk .  results—high serum concentrations of cholesterol and fas were associated with an increased odds .  the milk production response depended on body condition and was 085 kg/day at peak lactation in cows with a precalving bcs of 325 to 375 and was 12 kg/day for the first 90 days of lactation in fat cows (bcs 40)(duffield et .  treatment with dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher bhb concentrations in a study involving four herds (tatone and .  too high a content of nfc predisposes a cow to acidosis reducing dmi; too low a content prepartum will also predispose cows to acidosis postpartum; too much ndf will also limit dmi .  the key areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management negative energy balance hypocalcaemia rumen health and trace .  these are: 1) the experimental models used to assess feeding fat; 2) the quantities of fat fed; and 3) the fatty acid profile of the .  a negative energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta metritis and mastitis through impaired .  additionally the type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (whelan et al 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein .  impaired immune function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis .  with lowquality grass silage or where bcs is very low at dry .  it seems logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets especially when fed as total mixed rations (tmr) should help maintain dmi around calving and promote more rapid increases in dmi after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum .  fatty acids from lipolysis and amino acids from proteolysis enter the liver and can undergo different .  clinical hypocalcaemia commonly referred to as milk fever was first described in 1793 which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase .  occasionally cows with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs such as licking and .  because of the positive effects on lipid metabolism diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates increased concentrations of liver glycogen and reduced concentrations of .  appropriate and timely coordination of these ca regulation mediators is essential as milk fever results when blood and extracellular ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation resulting in insufficient ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency .  cows fed either ration ad libitum gained about 02 body condition score units during the dry period whereas restricted cows lost about 05 body condition units from dry-off .  according to his data fiber sources are classified according to their ability to stimulate rumination which was directly related to the size of particle and suggested that lactating holstein cows should receive diets containing at least 21% physically effective ndf in order to maintain milk fat content .  no treatment effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake body weight and body condition score .  continuous intravenous infusion is not practical in most field situations and may further decrease dry matter intake and is therefore .  6 improving energy supply to late gestation and early postpartum dairy cows

sixty-five multiparous holstein cows were used to test the effects of feeding diets of varied ruminal carbohydrate availability during the transition period on dry matter intake blood metabolites and .  of the three major subclinical metabolic diseases the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis which is common and associated with significant .  there was a 5% relative increase in the odds of rp for each 01 mmol/l increase in cholesterol or fas concentration in the week .  their analysis revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta milk fever .  while neb is a physiologically normal process excessive neb reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects .  other practices that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with .  1 monitoring negative energy balance in transition cows for better dairy herd results

introduction 

most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (neb) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (hayirli et .  however most transition cow diseases have a range of severity and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd1213-35 the consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health reproduction and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease6’26-32 non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (bhb) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the .  the principal metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver ketosis subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever sub-clinical hypocalcemia udder edema); and problems related to the immune system (retained placenta .  nevertheless diets that minimize the risk for hepatic lipidosis and ketosis are expected to improve postpartum energy balance and resumption .  it is difficult to determine whether the negative effect of triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue on postpartum resumption of ovarian cycles is direct or just a consequence of negative .  cows with serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 18 mmol/l and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 30 times and cows with serum bhba concentrations above 1400 umol/l were 14 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (duffield et al 2005)  thresholds for defining subclinical disease most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease .  if dmi is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference metabolic problems may get worse rather .  evidence from our group and miner institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in .  a dose of propylene glycol of 1l per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased bhba and nefa and increased glucose concentrations (studer et .  furthermore supplemental fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation .  this paper reviews testing of neb-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (sck) individual animal and herd consequences treatment and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to neb in .  periparturient diseases such as milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasums can all be associated with poor transition (see .  we suggest lactational incidences of das < 3% clinical milk fever < 2% and retained fetal membranes of .  this results in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland2-11 the formation of ketone bodies (bhb acetoacetate and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues11 however when there is excessive ketone body formation hyperketonemia can result16’26 higher dmi post-partum generally results in lower circulating nefa and bhb and has been associated with improved health performance and less severe post-partum neb18 optimizing dmi during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health .  a pooled summary of the two canadian projects showed that monensin crc reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by .  we counsel 10 to 20% on the top screen 50 to 60% in the middle and < 40% in the bottom pan with the long straw or hay particles not more than .  cows with ketosis were 12 times more likely to develop .  cows with marginal pretreatment vitamin e status (serum α-tocopherol to cholesterol mass ratio < 25 × 10-3) that received an injection of vitamin e tended to have reduced risk of .  cows often fail to adapt to these metabolic and management changes resulting in 75% of dairy cow disease incidence during the first month after calving and substantial economic losses to the dairy industry (leblanc et .  similarly grass based dry cow diets are difficult to control mineral intake and therefore can be problematic with regards to milk fever control thus such herds with problems should consider ideally having cows three weeks indoors on a controlled ration pre-calving even if grass is utilised in the far off .  direct microbial supplements are also being investigated with the aim of controlling lactic acid production .  a significant decrease in nefa bhba and glucose was noted in the .  monitoring prevention and treatment of infectious and metabolic disorders characteristic of early lactation (eg ketosis retained placenta metritis mastitis hypocalcemia) decreases the incidence of displaced abomasa on .  no milk production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest bhba concentrations and were at decreased risk of .  (2000) reported that elevated glucose concentrations such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for .  6 production-related metabolic disorders of cattle: ketosis milk fever and grass staggers

ruminants differ from monogastrics because of the particularities of ruminal digestion .  the tissues produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to nefa .  therefore cattle are largely dependent on hepatic production of glucose from volatile fatty acids and other .  further diseases like da retained fetal membranes and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and .  the somatotropin in concert with elevated cortisol stimulates the liver to produce .  monensin treatment in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 .  elevated bhba concentrations above 1000 μmol/l increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (duffield 1997; geishauser et al 1997 leblanc et .  plasma glucose concentrations tended to be higher and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous .  randomised controlled trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment .  this situation leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (sara) and contributes to reduced dmi and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early .  partial dcad is another option for control of milk fever if .  recent work at guelph (osborne 2003) indicates that a dmi of less than 12 kg per cow per day in the last 3 weeks prior to calving substantially increases the subsequent risk of subclinical ketosis (odds ratio 57 p .  most of the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid amino acids and the glycerol liberated .  cows with concentrations of bhba at or above1400 µmol/l in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement .  these factors are: high bcs at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma nefa (cameron et al 1998); reduced dmi in the transition period (constable et al 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio .  treatment options for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol and ancillary treatments such as administration of b-vitamins choline .  in irish data mcnamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four .  in that analysis (drackley 2003) dmi for wk 3 postpartum was not correlated with dmi prepartum but dmi for wk 1 postpartum was correlated with dmi for wk –1 (r = 044 p .  that is ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead .  at the cow level the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum bhb > 06 to 08 mmol/l; pre-partum nefa > 03 to 05 meq/l; post-partum nefa > 07 to 1 m eq/l; and post-partum bhb > 10 to 14 mmol/l27 at the herd level negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above6-32 herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes33 an initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere33 eg test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to .  if dietary nfc increases abruptly at calving with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates the amount of vfa produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of vfa in .  if the low bcs is only noticed at dry off eight weeks pre-calving ad libitum good-quality or very good-quality grass silage is enough to increase bcs by 05 units (grass silage quality 72 dmd .  a link between subclinical ketosis and the increased incidence of cystic ovaries has been reported suggesting an impact on ovarian function (dohoo and .  for nutritional management of far-off cows we suggest examining diet formulation and aiming for 110 to 120% of metabolizable energy (me] requirements and over 1000 g/d of metabolizable .  the objectives here were to: 1 identify critical thresholds above which nefa and bhb concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2 investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall tmr-fed herds; 3 evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above nefa and bhb critical thresholds; 4 evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5 intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6 identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7 evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with .  given that lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch] microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 22 to 44 lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation .  a cow diagnosed with mas¬ titis is 42 times more likely to have another case of clinical mastitis during the subsequent lactation34 and cows with early lactation mastitis experience decreased milk production and have a poorer pregnancy risk to first insemination39 the average total cost for a case of mastitis in the first 30 dim is $444 with $128 in direct costs and $316 in indirect costs; the majority of indirect cost is associated with future milk loss38 nearly 40% of cows that calve develop metritis and multiparous cows with metritis produce less milk have lower pregnancy risks and are more likely to be culled than healthy cows40 the average cost per case of metritis is estimated to be $396 with 30% due to direct costs and 70% to indirect costs28 the average cost per case of da is estimated to be $700 with 70% due to direct costs and 30% to indirect costs28 the high incidence and/or high cost of these post¬ partum diseases highlights the importance of minimizing disease incidence for both individual animal health and .  as the amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid .  in a recently reported commercial field trial (sanchez et al 2003) cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (p < 010) for fewer incidents of milk fever displaced abomasum mastitis and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of .  when this system is out of balance hypocalcemia can result1415 occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (dmi) that occurs in the periparturient period which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy .  based on the above data it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum bhba should start at about .  thus oral ca administration is the preferred route of ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood .  metabolic alkalosis can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate .  the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins .  duffield (1997) established that when bhb reaches 1400 μmol/l (146 mg/dl) in blood the incidence of metabolic disorders increases and when the value is above 2000 μmol/l (208 mg/dl) milk production begins .  the nutritional factors include ndf content and digestibility and nfc content and fermentability in both the pre- and .  we advise hyperketonemia (defined as bhb concentration >12 mmol/l) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for .  however ketosis as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several .  the secretion of buffers in the saliva is equivalent to more than 3 kg of sodium bicarbonate and 1 kg of disodium phosphate .  the safest way to assess this to guarantee feed availability is to use the feed bunk .  increased levels of milk production may be associated with increased fat mobilization and a greater risk .  milk fever is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by .  the relationship between displaced abomasum and ketosis has been identified .  peak incidence occurs at 5 days in milk and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week .  more recently we showed that intravenous glucose administration (fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower bhb concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (mann and .  for those using the cornell net carbohydrate and protein system (cncps) version 61; the fetal placental and mammogenesis requirements for nutrients are now more dynamic and added .   association with periparturient disease several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and .  it is now well established that dry matter intake (dmi) decreases as .  the metabolites non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (bhb) are common measures of neb and/or ketosis in transition animals (duffield et .  because dmi of cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 d before calving it has been assumed that increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts of key nutrients such as protein despite lower .  grass dry matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg dm depending on the time .  physiological and pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (duffield et al 2002) and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (dohoo and martin 1984; kremer et .  concentrations of linoleic acid in hepatic phospholipids at d 1 postpartum were more than doubled relative to controls or cows administered saturated .  for example in the case of mastitis herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded all gram-negative cases might not be recorded and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would .  at the same time animals often show a substantial decrease in dry .  10 the effect of prepartum injection of vitamin e on health in transition dairy cows

the objective of this study was to investigate parenteral vitamin e for the prevention of peripartum disease in .  in a more recent study we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases such as metritis and also improved fertility (barragan et .  impact on milk production and milk components in general there is consensus that a negative association between hyperketonemia and milk production exists however there are .  slowly injecting 05 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite chloride or borogluconate provide 15 to 4 g .  as has been well-documented previously and supported by recent research30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated nefa concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders lower milk production and poorer .  the standby therapy is slow intravenous administration of 500 ml of 23 per cent ca gluconate or ca borogluconate which provides approximately 105 g .  displaced abomasum (da) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left da (lda) side in cattle with lda being more frequently diagnosed than .  when states of hypocalcemia neb or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their .  to our knowledge no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and .  the association between milk fat and hyperketonemia is presumably because of increased availability of bhba and fatty acids for milk .  propylene glycol has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (emery et al 1964; sauer et .  monensin treatment also significantly reduced the concentrations of serum bhba and aspartate aminotransferase and increased the concentrations of serum glucose and urea (duffield et .  based on high correlations between dmi 1 d before calving and dmi at 21 d after calving (grummer 1995) a major focus on maximizing prepartum dmi has developed in .  it is unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to .  cows fed high fermentable energy diets prepartum have improved energy balance reduced concentrations of plasma nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate and reduced triacylglycerol infiltration in the .  sufficient nonfiber carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression .  precalving oral treatment with 300 g of propylene glycol per day for 10 days lowered serum non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) concentrations and improved some measures of reproductive performance in one study (formigoni et .  several aspects of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations affect dry matter intake and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient .  administration of a monensin controlled release capsule precalving reduced the incidence of clinical ketosis by 50% abomasal displacement by 40% and multiple illness by 40% (more than one disease) (duffield et .  this release of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies acetone acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate .  the management practices for transition cows must be focused on maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress .  treatment of cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (fisher et .  however herd level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management feed quality and nutritional programs cow comfort environment and other variables that influence dry .  the most consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis and .  treatment of hyperketonemic cows with pg will decrease the risk of negative subsequent health events improve reproduction and in some herds will improve milk production assuming that sck is the primary limitation for .  the positive effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis which might have positive effects on .  a 14-week dry period) cows fed average quality grass silage (68 dmd) should have an increase in bcs of approximately 05 units .  da is a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation .  a topdress of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect bhba nefa liver glycogen or .  one of the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone acetoacetate ß-hydroxybutyrate [bhb]) and their release into .  data from ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the prepartum period which clearly indicated that dmi was compromised in these animals32 furthermore nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the .  it has been speculated that feeding supplemental fat would reduce fatty acid mobilization from body stores and reduce liver fat accumulation .  however the authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause .  the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins .  there are two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed .  in-line milk analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical neb disorders .  this can be given as a bolus (most commercial products contain between 40 to 60 g of ca) or via an oral drench of 500 g ca propionate .  most prepartum diets contain between 30 to 40% ndf and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the .  dry matter intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (bw) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 14 % bw in the 7 to 10 d period .  consideration should be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol .  if > 40% of the animals sampled (3 to 14 dim) have a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l the recommendation is to start treating all fresh cows with pg at 3 dim for .  hypocalcemia impacts a large proportion of cows post-partum15-36 in a study including 55 dairy herds across the united states herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service6 with such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a .  3 elevated non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to .  the enormous and immediate requirement of calcium (ca) for colostrum and milk production paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition creates a large ca deficit that takes days .  while dietary fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (grum et al 1996; douglas et al 2004 2006) the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (douglas et .  hypocalcemia and hyperketonemia as mentioned above have an effect on proper immune function thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or .  leblanc et al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/l bhba in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an .  post-calving the ideal window for herd monitoring for neb is in the days 15-50 in milk post calving the thresholds are different and nefa >07mmol/l and bhb >14mmol/l are indicative .  negative energy balance fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome clinical ketosis and .  for clinical application primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin e

11 metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
a retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) β-hydroxybutyrate (bhba) glucose and calcium (ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (da) clinical ketosis and culling in .  regardless of the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of .  the use of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol and ionophores may also aid in the prevention .  in particular supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa) to the intestine might .  fat or lipid deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as nefa plus the glycerol backbone of .  another fundamental player in milk fever prevention .  recent studies support both the subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on .  additionally potassium is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in .  if we think about the drop in intake and the increase in nutrient needs the main negative effects are animals going into a negative energy balance (because they are using more nutrients than what they are consuming) and developing metabolic diseases such as ketosis and .  12 evaluation of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

objective—to identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables as measured in the week before parturition that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (rp) in .  during this time cows experience four main physiological challenges: a drop in dry matter intake an increase in nutrient demands immunosuppression and systemic stress and inflammation (especially .  it seems logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets especially when fed as a total mixed ration (tmr) should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum .  maximizing dry matter intake (dmi) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition .  although a detailed discussion of ca metabolism is beyond the scope of this article multiple hormones and minerals are important for appropriate ca regulation (goff 2014); the amount of ca located in various ‘pools’ within the cow is noted in .  one recent study showed possible beneficial effects of using dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in raising glucose and insulin concentrations and lower ing bhb concentrations in 31 ketotic cows with low feed intake and milk production postpartum (van der drift and .  the typical decrease in dmi before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and nel by about 2 percentage units and 084 mj/kg of dm respectively in the .  whatever strategy is used to feed the early lactation cow some consideration should be given to determine if nutrient supply is meeting nutrient demands at this crucial time in the .  while prevention of neb is beyond the scope of this review controlled-energy dry cow diets and feeding of monensin have been found to lessen neb and help cows transition more smoothly .  in several studies oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (mcart and others 2011 mcart and others 2012a tatone and others 2016a gordon and .  calcium is necessary for all muscle and nerve function and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition1 these processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of .  however for diets based on grass silage and straw fed in restricted amounts improvements in milk protein concentration were noted in early lactation following supplementary protein feeding in the dry period .  pronounced accumulation of fat in the liver with liver damage and/or reduced liver function (van den top et al 1996) compromises among other things .  (1998) fed 50 multiparous and 25 primigravid holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 .  this approach was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver and control blood .  7 physiological and pathological adaptations in dairy cows that may increase susceptibility to periparturient diseases and disorders

dairy cows undergo tremendous metabolic and physiological adaptations around parturition to .  dohoo and martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four .  in a study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves postpartum fever retained placenta metritis and decreased .  in addition the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (bhb) and .  other key areas for monitoring include monitoring of markers of energy balance – it is advised to measure a cohort at least 10-12 or 10% of large groups of dry cows between five to 15 days pre-calving for nefa where >04mmol/l and bhb where > 07mmol/l is indicative of a problem .  roche (2003) demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from .  assuming that higher producing cows are more likely to be hyperketonemic a larger proportion of subclinically ketotic cows combined with misclassification bias of clinical ketosis cases could mute any association between clinical ketosis and previous lactation .  conversely if each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event the true incidence of mastitis would be .  duffield et al (1998b) reported that monensin crc administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence prevalence and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd .  role of feed additives in addition to good nutrition certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when .  fat accumulation may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis which in turn may predispose cows to other .  parity season of par-turition existence of twins or dystocia body condition score and vitamin e treatment were included in the model .  milk fever is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted .  dietary carbohydrates adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function prevent displaced abomasum and achieve .  protein and amino .  when formulating diets to prevent displaced abomasa several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber maximization of dry matter intake and limiting the energy density of .  even in herds with very low milk fever incidence subclinical hypocalcemia [sch) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential5'25 36 as these associations continue to be understood the need for strategies to reduce sch incidence is becoming .  duffield and geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of bhba at or above .  manipulation of the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) and postpartum .  the proportion of ndf and nfc in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to .  similarly the concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only .  the role of minerals in the diet contributing to dcad can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full dcad strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms for this to work the dcad value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time .  the general concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for .  negative energy balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to .  during this period cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between .  use of a prepartum “vfa load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered vfa concentrations and ph in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (andersen et al 1999) and did not positively affect dmi or milk production postpartum (ingvartsen et .  prevention should therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry .  the incidence of subclinical ketosis defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/l) was reduced by 50% and blood bhba levels were reduced by 40% for the high .  carbohydrates include both fiber (ndf) and non-fiber .  propylene glycol requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (sauer et .  delivering a consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced .  green (1997) reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (crc) which delivers 335 mg per day significantly reduced the concentrations of bhba and increased those .  subclinical ketosis is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases lost milk production reduced reproductive performance and increased .  however when the increase in blood surpasses what is accepted as normal for the specific time period or stage of lactation the animal enters a state of ketosis or more specifically hyperketonaemia (an abnormally high concentration of ketone bodies in the blood commonly defined as bhb ≥ .  because dmi of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total .  the goals of the transition diet (specifically designed to prevent subclinical ketosis) are to maximize dry matter intake and to provide adequate energy density .  we advise administration of one dose of oral ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium with a second of oral ca dose given 12 to 24 .  sck is a condition not recognized clinically until it predisposes cows and herds to higher incidences of transition cow diseases lower milk production and lower .  other studies in which supplemental fat was fed at more typical levels before calving also show no responses in dmi or milk production (skaar et al 1989; allen et al 1995; salfer et al 1995; burhans and .  while prepartum dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in .  in a nationwide survey it was determined that the da incidence in united states dairy herds was approximately 35% with occurrence varying from 25% in herds with 500 or more cows to 48% in herds having fewer than 500 cows1 moreover da is known as an immediate postpartum condition with more than half of lda cases being diagnosed within 2 weeks after parturition and 80% of the lda cases occurring within the first month of lactation2 economic analyses have determined that the average cost per da diagnosis is more than $700 when accounting for direct (eg examination correction medication discarded milk death loss) and indirect (eg future milk production loss loss of body weight decreased reproductive performance increase risk of removal from the herd) costs3 assuming the 35% incidence reported by the us department of agriculture survey with the estimated 9 million dairy cows in united states it is reasonable to approximate that the annual losses to the dairy industry from da exceed 150 .  milk protein percent has been reported to be lower in cows with subclinical ketosis (miettenan and .  clinical hypocalcemia (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle1 this disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum ketosis metritis retained placenta mastitis culling and decreased milk production2-4 traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum .  while fermentation of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for .  increasing starch also tends to improve total dmi diet digestibility and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (grummer 1995) at least over the short-term in the .  while rumen-inert fat supplements often increase milk production for early lactation cows and may improve subsequent reproductive performance (staples et al 1998) fat supplementation does not seem to increase milk yield until after the first few weeks of lactation .  to maintain calcium concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone decreases calcium excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption .  reductions in liver enzymes and improvements in energy indicators such increased glucose and lower nefa and bhba suggest a possible impact on liver function .  the interplay between metabolic adaptation and immune function is particularly important during this period as the dietary supply of energy protein macro- and microminerals in relation to requirements as well as the fatty acid balance affect .  negative associations between subclinical hypocalcemia and milk production have not been reported perhaps because higher previous lactation milk yield is a risk factor for the occurrence of .  however several studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes increased mobilization of body tissue increased circulating concentrations of nefa and bhb and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and .  in addition most hypomagnesaemic cows also experience some degree of hypocalcaemia and will benefit from .  abomasal displacement is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult .  overall there were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta clinical mastitis metritis endometritis ketosis displaced abomasum .  the most common compositions include calcium chloride calcium sulfate and calcium carbonate which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent 70 per cent and 50 per cent in dairy .  in addition the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta metritis endometritis and mastitis41 as with these disease outcomes increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on .  in another large study including cows from 20 herds the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (seifi and .  poor adaptation through this period expressed as excessively elevated concentrations of non-esterified fatty acids (nefas) pre- or post-partum and elevated concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate post-partum increases an individual animal’s risk of post-partum disease removal from the herd reproductive difficulty and reduced .  to be reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density .  obesity leads to increased susceptibility to the complex of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases known as the "fat cow syndrome" .  subclinical ketosis as a risk factor for subsequent disease occurrence has been linked with clinical ketosis abomasal displacement metritis mastitis and cystic .  although other feeding standards organisations (nrc 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the pdi allowances research work carried out in ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage .  a significant body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine .  by measuring the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can .  while prepartum dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in .  the negative associations between subclinical ketosis health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health .  herds with more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of nefas and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events poorer reproduction and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative .  a dysregulated immune system increases susceptibility to infection and retained placenta metritis and mastitis .  the fat cows had an increase of 446 % blood nefa at 3 d postpartum compared to their prepartum nefa concentration while normal cows exhibited an increase of .  these include macromineral nutrition energy nutrition and protein and amino .  however there is much variation in the magnitude of the neb after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (garnsworthy 1989) the severity of the depression in dmi (bertics et al 1992) the quality of the ration .  the discrepancy as discussed above likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period .  this paper reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds) (3) treatment approaches for affected cows and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative .  dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (hayirli et al 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum due to milk production the demands for glucose amino acids and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements .  limit protein and energy intake provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and .  any animal with a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l is considered positive and should receive 300 ml of propylene glycol (pg) for .  now we cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through .  relative effects of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of .  to maintain ca concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction) while transferring a large quantity to colostrum and milk cows increase the secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of ca from bone decreases ca excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of ca via vitamin .  in addition the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated .  dietary fat because of its high energy density supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the .  calcium homeostasis has a key role in the health of the cow at calving clinical (the tip of the iceberg effect) and subclinical hypocalcaemia have a major detrimental effect on the early lactation cow in terms of health .  based on current literature and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to .  one can further speculate that if more glucose precursors are available in the form of propionate then fewer amino acids will be used for gluconeogenesis in supplying energy to .  in addition the odds ratio decreased from 07 at 1100 umol/l bhba to 031 at 1900 umol/l bhba implying in a sense a dose effect of .  noticeable milk yield losses weeks prior to actual diagnosis is strong support for the negative and unrealised impact of subclinical ketosis on .  overconditioned cows lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (reid et .  both subclinical ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk .  the metabolic disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum .  treating sck cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put .  common metabolic problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of .  we must recognize that adipose tissue can synthesize fat (use lipoproteins to make fat) and mobilize nefa (hydrolyze .  our hypothesis was that the change in dmi before calving was more highly related to postpartum dmi and fat accumulation in the liver than to the .  large and small continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases around calving .  the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase nfc in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to vfa to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer tmr to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed) and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the postpartum diet .  goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation .  prevent these diseases are therefore based on major factors directly or indirectly increasing the risk of fatty liver ketosis acidosis and displaced abomasum—factors such as over-conditioning at calving excessive mobilisation of body fat low nutrient intake nutrient or diet specific factors and management and environmental stress .  of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever ketosis metritis and retained placenta) will reduce the risk for da .  concentrations of cholesterol and fas were associated with an increased odds of rp .  production response depended on body condition and was 085 kg/day at peak lactation in cows with a precalving bcs of 325 to 375 and was 12 kg/day for the first 90 days of lactation in fat cows (bcs 40)(duffield et al 1999a) .  dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher bhb concentrations in a study involving four herds (tatone and others 2016a) .  a content of nfc predisposes a cow to acidosis reducing dmi; too low a content prepartum will also predispose cows to acidosis postpartum; too much ndf will also limit dmi (mertens 1994) .  areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management negative energy balance hypocalcaemia rumen health and trace element status .  1) the experimental models used to assess feeding fat; 2) the quantities of fat fed; and 3) the fatty acid profile of the dietary fats .  energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta metritis and mastitis through impaired immune function .  type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (whelan et al 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein and fat .  function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis and mastitis .  grass silage or where bcs is very low at dry off (eg .  logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets especially when fed as total mixed rations (tmr) should help maintain dmi around calving and promote more rapid increases in dmi after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders .  from lipolysis and amino acids from proteolysis enter the liver and can undergo different metabolic fates .  commonly referred to as milk fever was first described in 1793 which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase milk production .  with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs such as licking and blindness (11) .  the positive effects on lipid metabolism diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates increased concentrations of liver glycogen and reduced concentrations of hepatic triacylglycerol .  timely coordination of these ca regulation mediators is essential as milk fever results when blood and extracellular ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation resulting in insufficient ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency and death .  either ration ad libitum gained about 02 body condition score units during the dry period whereas restricted cows lost about 05 body condition units from dry-off to calving .  his data fiber sources are classified according to their ability to stimulate rumination which was directly related to the size of particle and suggested that lactating holstein cows should receive diets containing at least 21% physically effective ndf in order to maintain milk fat content above 35% .  effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake body weight and body condition score were observed .  infusion is not practical in most field situations and may further decrease dry matter intake and is therefore not recommended .  energy supply to late gestation and early postpartum dairy cows

sixty-five multiparous holstein cows were used to test the effects of feeding diets of varied ruminal carbohydrate availability during the transition period on dry matter intake blood metabolites and lactational performance .  three major subclinical metabolic diseases the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis which is common and associated with significant economic loss .  a 5% relative increase in the odds of rp for each 01 mmol/l increase in cholesterol or fas concentration in the week before parturition .  revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta milk fever and mastitis .  is a physiologically normal process excessive neb reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects after calving .  that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with older cows .  negative energy balance in transition cows for better dairy herd results

introduction 

most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (neb) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) .  transition cow diseases have a range of severity and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd1213-35 the consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health reproduction and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease6’26-32 non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (bhb) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the transition period .  metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver ketosis subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever sub-clinical hypocalcemia udder edema); and problems related to the immune system (retained placenta metritis mastitis) .  that minimize the risk for hepatic lipidosis and ketosis are expected to improve postpartum energy balance and resumption of cyclicity .  difficult to determine whether the negative effect of triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue on postpartum resumption of ovarian cycles is direct or just a consequence of negative energy balance .  serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 18 mmol/l and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 30 times and cows with serum bhba concentrations above 1400 umol/l were 14 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (duffield et al 2005)  thresholds for defining subclinical disease most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease are arbitrary .  is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference metabolic problems may get worse rather than better .  our group and miner institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in fresh diets .  of propylene glycol of 1l per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased bhba and nefa and increased glucose concentrations (studer et al 1993) .  fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation (chilliard 1993) .  reviews testing of neb-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (sck) individual animal and herd consequences treatment and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to neb in dairy cows .  such as milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasums can all be associated with poor transition (see table 1) .  lactational incidences of das < 3% clinical milk fever < 2% and retained fetal membranes of < 8% .  in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland2-11 the formation of ketone bodies (bhb acetoacetate and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues11 however when there is excessive ketone body formation hyperketonemia can result16’26 higher dmi post-partum generally results in lower circulating nefa and bhb and has been associated with improved health performance and less severe post-partum neb18 optimizing dmi during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health and production .  summary of the two canadian projects showed that monensin crc reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by 40% each .  10 to 20% on the top screen 50 to 60% in the middle and < 40% in the bottom pan with the long straw or hay particles not more than 4 cm .  ketosis were 12 times more likely to develop displaced abomasums .  marginal pretreatment vitamin e status (serum α-tocopherol to cholesterol mass ratio < 25 × 10-3) that received an injection of vitamin e tended to have reduced risk of retained placenta .  fail to adapt to these metabolic and management changes resulting in 75% of dairy cow disease incidence during the first month after calving and substantial economic losses to the dairy industry (leblanc et al 2006) .  based dry cow diets are difficult to control mineral intake and therefore can be problematic with regards to milk fever control thus such herds with problems should consider ideally having cows three weeks indoors on a controlled ration pre-calving even if grass is utilised in the far off dry period .  supplements are also being investigated with the aim of controlling lactic acid production (kung 1999) .  decrease in nefa bhba and glucose was noted in the precalving period .  and treatment of infectious and metabolic disorders characteristic of early lactation (eg ketosis retained placenta metritis mastitis hypocalcemia) decreases the incidence of displaced abomasa on dairy farms .  production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest bhba concentrations and were at decreased risk of subclinical ketosis .  that elevated glucose concentrations such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for abomasal displacement .  metabolic disorders of cattle: ketosis milk fever and grass staggers

ruminants differ from monogastrics because of the particularities of ruminal digestion of nutrients .  produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to nefa for utilization .  are largely dependent on hepatic production of glucose from volatile fatty acids and other glucogenic precursors .  like da retained fetal membranes and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and lag either .  in concert with elevated cortisol stimulates the liver to produce more glucose .  in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 wk postcalving .  concentrations above 1000 μmol/l increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (duffield 1997; geishauser et al 1997 leblanc et al 2005) .  concentrations tended to be higher and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet .  trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment of hyperketonaemia .  leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (sara) and contributes to reduced dmi and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early postpartum period .  is another option for control of milk fever if implemented correctly .  at guelph (osborne 2003) indicates that a dmi of less than 12 kg per cow per day in the last 3 weeks prior to calving substantially increases the subsequent risk of subclinical ketosis (odds ratio 57 p < 005) .  the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid amino acids and the glycerol liberated from adipose .  concentrations of bhba at or above1400 µmol/l in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement (duffield 1997) .  are: high bcs at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma nefa (cameron et al 1998); reduced dmi in the transition period (constable et al 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio (shaver 1997) .  for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol and ancillary treatments such as administration of b-vitamins choline and glucocorticoids .  data mcnamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four weeks pre-calving .  analysis (drackley 2003) dmi for wk 3 postpartum was not correlated with dmi prepartum but dmi for wk 1 postpartum was correlated with dmi for wk –1 (r = 044 p < 001) .  ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead to ketosis .  cow level the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum bhb > 06 to 08 mmol/l; pre-partum nefa > 03 to 05 meq/l; post-partum nefa > 07 to 1 m eq/l; and post-partum bhb > 10 to 14 mmol/l27 at the herd level negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above6-32 herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes33 an initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere33 eg test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to 14 dim .  nfc increases abruptly at calving with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates the amount of vfa produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of vfa in the rumen .  low bcs is only noticed at dry off eight weeks pre-calving ad libitum good-quality or very good-quality grass silage is enough to increase bcs by 05 units (grass silage quality 72 dmd and above) .  between subclinical ketosis and the increased incidence of cystic ovaries has been reported suggesting an impact on ovarian function (dohoo and martin 1984) .  management of far-off cows we suggest examining diet formulation and aiming for 110 to 120% of metabolizable energy (me] requirements and over 1000 g/d of metabolizable protein (mp} .  here were to: 1 identify critical thresholds above which nefa and bhb concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2 investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall tmr-fed herds; 3 evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above nefa and bhb critical thresholds; 4 evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5 intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6 identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7 evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with propylene glycol .  lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch] microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 22 to 44 lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation outlined above .  diagnosed with mas¬ titis is 42 times more likely to have another case of clinical mastitis during the subsequent lactation34 and cows with early lactation mastitis experience decreased milk production and have a poorer pregnancy risk to first insemination39 the average total cost for a case of mastitis in the first 30 dim is $444 with $128 in direct costs and $316 in indirect costs; the majority of indirect cost is associated with future milk loss38 nearly 40% of cows that calve develop metritis and multiparous cows with metritis produce less milk have lower pregnancy risks and are more likely to be culled than healthy cows40 the average cost per case of metritis is estimated to be $396 with 30% due to direct costs and 70% to indirect costs28 the average cost per case of da is estimated to be $700 with 70% due to direct costs and 30% to indirect costs28 the high incidence and/or high cost of these post¬ partum diseases highlights the importance of minimizing disease incidence for both individual animal health and herd profitability .  amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid (goff 1999) .  recently reported commercial field trial (sanchez et al 2003) cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (p < 010) for fewer incidents of milk fever displaced abomasum mastitis and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of palm oil .  system is out of balance hypocalcemia can result1415 occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (dmi) that occurs in the periparturient period which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy balance (neb) .  the above data it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum bhba should start at about 1400 umol/l .  ca administration is the preferred route of ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood ca concentration .  can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate in hypocalcaemia .  was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins and minerals .  established that when bhb reaches 1400 μmol/l (146 mg/dl) in blood the incidence of metabolic disorders increases and when the value is above 2000 μmol/l (208 mg/dl) milk production begins to suffer .  factors include ndf content and digestibility and nfc content and fermentability in both the pre- and postpartum diets .  hyperketonemia (defined as bhb concentration >12 mmol/l) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for first-parity heifers .  as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several recent papers .  of buffers in the saliva is equivalent to more than 3 kg of sodium bicarbonate and 1 kg of disodium phosphate (erdman 1988) .  way to assess this to guarantee feed availability is to use the feed bunk space method .  of milk production may be associated with increased fat mobilization and a greater risk of hyperketonemia .  is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by some farms .  between displaced abomasum and ketosis has been identified as bi-directional .  occurs at 5 days in milk and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week of lactation .  we showed that intravenous glucose administration (fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower bhb concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (mann and others 2017) .  using the cornell net carbohydrate and protein system (cncps) version 61; the fetal placental and mammogenesis requirements for nutrients are now more dynamic and added into requirements .  with periparturient disease several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and periparturient disease .  now well established that dry matter intake (dmi) decreases as calving approaches .  non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (bhb) are common measures of neb and/or ketosis in transition animals (duffield et al 2009) .  of cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 d before calving it has been assumed that increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total dmi .  matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg dm depending on the time of year .  pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (duffield et al 2002) and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (dohoo and martin 1984; kremer et al 1993) .  linoleic acid in hepatic phospholipids at d 1 postpartum were more than doubled relative to controls or cows administered saturated fatty acids .  in the case of mastitis herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded all gram-negative cases might not be recorded and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would be underestimated .  same time animals often show a substantial decrease in dry matter intake .  effect of prepartum injection of vitamin e on health in transition dairy cows

the objective of this study was to investigate parenteral vitamin e for the prevention of peripartum disease in dairy cows .  more recent study we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases such as metritis and also improved fertility (barragan et al 2021) .  milk production and milk components in general there is consensus that a negative association between hyperketonemia and milk production exists however there are conflicting reports .  05 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite chloride or borogluconate provide 15 to 4 g of mg .  been well-documented previously and supported by recent research30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated nefa concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders lower milk production and poorer reproductive performance .  therapy is slow intravenous administration of 500 ml of 23 per cent ca gluconate or ca borogluconate which provides approximately 105 g of ca .  (da) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left da (lda) side in cattle with lda being more frequently diagnosed than right da .  of hypocalcemia neb or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their full potential .  knowledge no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and production outcomes .  between milk fat and hyperketonemia is presumably because of increased availability of bhba and fatty acids for milk fat synthesis .  has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (emery et al 1964; sauer et al 1973) .  also significantly reduced the concentrations of serum bhba and aspartate aminotransferase and increased the concentrations of serum glucose and urea (duffield et al 1998a) .  high correlations between dmi 1 d before calving and dmi at 21 d after calving (grummer 1995) a major focus on maximizing prepartum dmi has developed in the field .  unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to subclinical ketosis .  high fermentable energy diets prepartum have improved energy balance reduced concentrations of plasma nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate and reduced triacylglycerol infiltration in the hepatic tissue .  carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression of ketogenesis .  treatment with 300 g of propylene glycol per day for 10 days lowered serum non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) concentrations and improved some measures of reproductive performance in one study (formigoni et al 1996) .  of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations affect dry matter intake and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient health problems .  a monensin controlled release capsule precalving reduced the incidence of clinical ketosis by 50% abomasal displacement by 40% and multiple illness by 40% (more than one disease) (duffield et al 1999b) .  of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies acetone acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate (bhb) (11) .  practices for transition cows must be focused on maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation .  cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (fisher et al 1973) .  level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management feed quality and nutritional programs cow comfort environment and other variables that influence dry matter intake .  consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis and displaced abomasum .  hyperketonemic cows with pg will decrease the risk of negative subsequent health events improve reproduction and in some herds will improve milk production assuming that sck is the primary limitation for these outcomes .  effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis which might have positive effects on postpartum fertility .  dry period) cows fed average quality grass silage (68 dmd) should have an increase in bcs of approximately 05 units before calving .  a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation dairy cows .  of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect bhba nefa liver glycogen or liver triglyceride .  the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone acetoacetate ß-hydroxybutyrate [bhb]) and their release into the bloodstream .  ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the prepartum period which clearly indicated that dmi was compromised in these animals32 furthermore nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the post-partum period .  been speculated that feeding supplemental fat would reduce fatty acid mobilization from body stores and reduce liver fat accumulation (kronfeld 1982) .  authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause of metritis .  was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins and minerals .  two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed delivery frequency .  analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical neb disorders and mastitis .  be given as a bolus (most commercial products contain between 40 to 60 g of ca) or via an oral drench of 500 g ca propionate (table 2) .  diets contain between 30 to 40% ndf and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the specific herd .  intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (bw) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 14 % bw in the 7 to 10 d period before calving .  be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol and monensin .  40% of the animals sampled (3 to 14 dim) have a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l the recommendation is to start treating all fresh cows with pg at 3 dim for 5 days .  a large proportion of cows post-partum15-36 in a study including 55 dairy herds across the united states herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service6 with such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a herd level .  non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to early lactation .  and immediate requirement of calcium (ca) for colostrum and milk production paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition creates a large ca deficit that takes days to rectify .  fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (grum et al 1996; douglas et al 2004 2006) the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (douglas et al 2004) .  hyperketonemia as mentioned above have an effect on proper immune function thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or calcium deficiencies .  al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/l bhba in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an abomasal displacement .  ideal window for herd monitoring for neb is in the days 15-50 in milk post calving the thresholds are different and nefa >07mmol/l and bhb >14mmol/l are indicative of neb .  balance fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome clinical ketosis and abomasal displacement .  application primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin e

11 metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
a retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) β-hydroxybutyrate (bhba) glucose and calcium (ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (da) clinical ketosis and culling in holstein cows .  the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of clinical ketosis .  of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol and ionophores may also aid in the prevention of ketosis .  supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa) to the intestine might be beneficial .  lipid deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as nefa plus the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride .  player in milk fever prevention is potassium .  support both the subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on milk production .  is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in calcium regulation .  think about the drop in intake and the increase in nutrient needs the main negative effects are animals going into a negative energy balance (because they are using more nutrients than what they are consuming) and developing metabolic diseases such as ketosis and fatty liver .  of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

objective—to identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables as measured in the week before parturition that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (rp) in dairy cows .  time cows experience four main physiological challenges: a drop in dry matter intake an increase in nutrient demands immunosuppression and systemic stress and inflammation (especially around calving) .  logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets especially when fed as a total mixed ration (tmr) should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders .  matter intake (dmi) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition cow program .  detailed discussion of ca metabolism is beyond the scope of this article multiple hormones and minerals are important for appropriate ca regulation (goff 2014); the amount of ca located in various ‘pools’ within the cow is noted in fig 3 .  study showed possible beneficial effects of using dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in raising glucose and insulin concentrations and lower ing bhb concentrations in 31 ketotic cows with low feed intake and milk production postpartum (van der drift and others 2015) .  decrease in dmi before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and nel by about 2 percentage units and 084 mj/kg of dm respectively in the pre-calving diet .  is used to feed the early lactation cow some consideration should be given to determine if nutrient supply is meeting nutrient demands at this crucial time in the production cycle .  of neb is beyond the scope of this review controlled-energy dry cow diets and feeding of monensin have been found to lessen neb and help cows transition more smoothly into lactation .  studies oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (mcart and others 2011 mcart and others 2012a tatone and others 2016a gordon and others 2017) .  necessary for all muscle and nerve function and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition1 these processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of milk production .  diets based on grass silage and straw fed in restricted amounts improvements in milk protein concentration were noted in early lactation following supplementary protein feeding in the dry period (murphy 1999) .  of fat in the liver with liver damage and/or reduced liver function (van den top et al 1996) compromises among other things glucose synthesis .  50 multiparous and 25 primigravid holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 d postpartum .  was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver and control blood calcium concentrations .  and pathological adaptations in dairy cows that may increase susceptibility to periparturient diseases and disorders

dairy cows undergo tremendous metabolic and physiological adaptations around parturition to support lactation .  martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four days later .  study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves postpartum fever retained placenta metritis and decreased milk production .  the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (bhb) and fatty acids .  areas for monitoring include monitoring of markers of energy balance – it is advised to measure a cohort at least 10-12 or 10% of large groups of dry cows between five to 15 days pre-calving for nefa where >04mmol/l and bhb where > 07mmol/l is indicative of a problem with neb .  demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from subclinical hypocalcaemia .  higher producing cows are more likely to be hyperketonemic a larger proportion of subclinically ketotic cows combined with misclassification bias of clinical ketosis cases could mute any association between clinical ketosis and previous lactation milk yield .  each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event the true incidence of mastitis would be grossly overestimated .  al (1998b) reported that monensin crc administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence prevalence and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd field study .  feed additives in addition to good nutrition certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when administered prophylactically .  may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis which in turn may predispose cows to other metabolic abnormalities .  of par-turition existence of twins or dystocia body condition score and vitamin e treatment were included in the model as covariates .  is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted for centuries .  adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function prevent displaced abomasum and achieve high dmi .  amino acid nutrition .  diets to prevent displaced abomasa several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber maximization of dry matter intake and limiting the energy density of the diet .  herds with very low milk fever incidence subclinical hypocalcemia [sch) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential5'25 36 as these associations continue to be understood the need for strategies to reduce sch incidence is becoming more evident .  geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of bhba at or above 1400 umol/l .  the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) and postpartum lactational performance .  of ndf and nfc in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to maximizing dmi .  concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only 97 % .  of minerals in the diet contributing to dcad can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full dcad strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms for this to work the dcad value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time of calving .  concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for fresh cows .  balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to early lactation .  period cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between feed deliveries .  a prepartum “vfa load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered vfa concentrations and ph in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (andersen et al 1999) and did not positively affect dmi or milk production postpartum (ingvartsen et al 2001) .  therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry matter intake .  of subclinical ketosis defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/l) was reduced by 50% and blood bhba levels were reduced by 40% for the high monensin group .  both fiber (ndf) and non-fiber (nfc) categories .  requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (sauer et al 1989) .  consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced abomasum prevention .  reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (crc) which delivers 335 mg per day significantly reduced the concentrations of bhba and increased those of glucose .  is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases lost milk production reduced reproductive performance and increased culling risk .  the increase in blood surpasses what is accepted as normal for the specific time period or stage of lactation the animal enters a state of ketosis or more specifically hyperketonaemia (an abnormally high concentration of ketone bodies in the blood commonly defined as bhb ≥ 12 mmol/l) .  of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total feed intake .  of the transition diet (specifically designed to prevent subclinical ketosis) are to maximize dry matter intake and to provide adequate energy density (oetzel 1998) .  administration of one dose of oral ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium with a second of oral ca dose given 12 to 24 hours later .  a condition not recognized clinically until it predisposes cows and herds to higher incidences of transition cow diseases lower milk production and lower milk production .  in which supplemental fat was fed at more typical levels before calving also show no responses in dmi or milk production (skaar et al 1989; allen et al 1995; salfer et al 1995; burhans and bell 1998) .  dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in body condition .  nationwide survey it was determined that the da incidence in united states dairy herds was approximately 35% with occurrence varying from 25% in herds with 500 or more cows to 48% in herds having fewer than 500 cows1 moreover da is known as an immediate postpartum condition with more than half of lda cases being diagnosed within 2 weeks after parturition and 80% of the lda cases occurring within the first month of lactation2 economic analyses have determined that the average cost per da diagnosis is more than $700 when accounting for direct (eg examination correction medication discarded milk death loss) and indirect (eg future milk production loss loss of body weight decreased reproductive performance increase risk of removal from the herd) costs3 assuming the 35% incidence reported by the us department of agriculture survey with the estimated 9 million dairy cows in united states it is reasonable to approximate that the annual losses to the dairy industry from da exceed 150 million dollars .  percent has been reported to be lower in cows with subclinical ketosis (miettenan and setala 1993) .  (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle1 this disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum ketosis metritis retained placenta mastitis culling and decreased milk production2-4 traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration .  of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for glucose production .  also tends to improve total dmi diet digestibility and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (grummer 1995) at least over the short-term in the close-up diet .  fat supplements often increase milk production for early lactation cows and may improve subsequent reproductive performance (staples et al 1998) fat supplementation does not seem to increase milk yield until after the first few weeks of lactation (grummer 1995) .  calcium concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone decreases calcium excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of calcium .  liver enzymes and improvements in energy indicators such increased glucose and lower nefa and bhba suggest a possible impact on liver function and health .  between metabolic adaptation and immune function is particularly important during this period as the dietary supply of energy protein macro- and microminerals in relation to requirements as well as the fatty acid balance affect immune regulation .  between subclinical hypocalcemia and milk production have not been reported perhaps because higher previous lactation milk yield is a risk factor for the occurrence of milk fever .  studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes increased mobilization of body tissue increased circulating concentrations of nefa and bhb and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and reproductive performance .  most hypomagnesaemic cows also experience some degree of hypocalcaemia and will benefit from ca administration .  is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult dairy cows .  were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta clinical mastitis metritis endometritis ketosis displaced abomasum or lameness .  common compositions include calcium chloride calcium sulfate and calcium carbonate which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent 70 per cent and 50 per cent in dairy cattle respectively .  the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta metritis endometritis and mastitis41 as with these disease outcomes increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on productive outcomes .  large study including cows from 20 herds the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (seifi and others 2007) .  through this period expressed as excessively elevated concentrations of non-esterified fatty acids (nefas) pre- or post-partum and elevated concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate post-partum increases an individual animal’s risk of post-partum disease removal from the herd reproductive difficulty and reduced milk production .  reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density lipoproteins (vldl) .  to increased susceptibility to the complex of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases known as the "fat cow syndrome" (morrow 1976) .  as a risk factor for subsequent disease occurrence has been linked with clinical ketosis abomasal displacement metritis mastitis and cystic ovarian disease .  feeding standards organisations (nrc 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the pdi allowances research work carried out in ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage based diets .  body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine production diseases .  the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can be estimated .  dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in body condition .  associations between subclinical ketosis health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health and production .  more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of nefas and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events poorer reproduction and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative energy balance .  immune system increases susceptibility to infection and retained placenta metritis and mastitis can result .  cows had an increase of 446 % blood nefa at 3 d postpartum compared to their prepartum nefa concentration while normal cows exhibited an increase of 123 % .  macromineral nutrition energy nutrition and protein and amino acid nutrition .  is much variation in the magnitude of the neb after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (garnsworthy 1989) the severity of the depression in dmi (bertics et al 1992) the quality of the ration and season .  as discussed above likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period (drackley 1999) .  reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds) (3) treatment approaches for affected cows and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative energy balance .  intake (dmi) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (hayirli et al 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum due to milk production the demands for glucose amino acids and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements (bell 1995) .  and energy intake provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and withdraw concentrates .  with a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l is considered positive and should receive 300 ml of propylene glycol (pg) for 5 days .  cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through proper management .  of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of current research .  ca concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction) while transferring a large quantity to colostrum and milk cows increase the secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of ca from bone decreases ca excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of ca via vitamin d-dependent means .  the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated cows (p=009) .  because of its high energy density supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the transition period .  has a key role in the health of the cow at calving clinical (the tip of the iceberg effect) and subclinical hypocalcaemia have a major detrimental effect on the early lactation cow in terms of health and production .  current literature and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to ketosis treatment .  further speculate that if more glucose precursors are available in the form of propionate then fewer amino acids will be used for gluconeogenesis in supplying energy to the cow .  the odds ratio decreased from 07 at 1100 umol/l bhba to 031 at 1900 umol/l bhba implying in a sense a dose effect of ketone concentration .  yield losses weeks prior to actual diagnosis is strong support for the negative and unrealised impact of subclinical ketosis on milk production .  lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (reid et al 1986) .  ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk of culling .  disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum calcium concentrations .  cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put in place .  problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of ovarian cycles .  recognize that adipose tissue can synthesize fat (use lipoproteins to make fat) and mobilize nefa (hydrolyze body fat) .  was that the change in dmi before calving was more highly related to postpartum dmi and fat accumulation in the liver than to the absolute dmi .  