the objectives here were to: 1 identify critical thresholds above which nefa and bhb concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2 investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall tmr-fed herds; 3 evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above nefa and bhb critical thresholds; 4 evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5 intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6 identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7 evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with .  conversely if each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event the true incidence of mastitis would be .  roche (2003) demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from .  if grass silage quality is poor cows may lose bcs in the .  intravenous and even subcutaneous ca can result in a rebound hypocalcaemia 24 hours after administration (box 1) and thus repeated administration of intravenous or subcutaneous ca are counterproductive (blanc and others 2014 domino and .  however ketosis as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several .  recent studies support both the subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on .  although not common the ucd herd health group have encountered problems where occasionally some farms may feed the same mineral to milking and dry cows inadvertently or push the milking cow total mixed ration (tmr) in to dry cows this is important to look at as the level of calcium for example will be entirely different and can be very dangerous with regard to milk .  maximizing dry matter intake (dmi) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition .  treatment of cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (fisher et .  there are two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed .  calcium is necessary for all muscle and nerve function and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition1 these processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of .  monensin included at 30 grams per ton of total ration (high group) decreased the incidence of subclinical ketosis and significantly reduced blood bhba levels in the first three weeks postpartum (sauer et .  the proportion of ndf and nfc in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to .  this paper reviews testing of neb-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (sck) individual animal and herd consequences treatment and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to neb in .  these factors are: high bcs at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma nefa (cameron et al 1998); reduced dmi in the transition period (constable et al 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio .  this results in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland2-11 the formation of ketone bodies (bhb acetoacetate and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues11 however when there is excessive ketone body formation hyperketonemia can result16’26 higher dmi post-partum generally results in lower circulating nefa and bhb and has been associated with improved health performance and less severe post-partum neb18 optimizing dmi during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health .  clinical hypocalcemia (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle1 this disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum ketosis metritis retained placenta mastitis culling and decreased milk production2-4 traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum .  a portion of this increase in nefa is obligatory and is under hormonal control while another portion is the result of an energy deficit (negative energy balance or neb) (bertics et al 1992; grummer 1995; dyk and .  although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density .  high-fiber by-product feeds such as soybean hulls beet pulp corn gluten feed and wheat middlings that are highly digestible also can improve total .  managementpractices which aim to optimize dry matter intake (dmi)increase the energy density of the diets without sacrificingrumen function and maintain body condition score at 35on the 1–5 scale at calving are recommended (macdonaldand .  limit protein and energy intake provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and .  the discrepancy as discussed above likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period .  with regard to feed delivery frequency research has shown that when performed often up to four times a day this practice will stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk .  theneb and high plasma nefa contribute to the developmentof fatty liver syndrome which in turn is a contributing factorto other health concerns and periparturient immunosup-pression in the postpartum period (lacetera et al 2005;kehrli et .  recent advances in understanding of production diseases include the emergence of propylene glycol and rumen protected choline as the supplements of choice for preventing fatty liver and the absence of any preventative effect of increased energy density in the close-up dry period diet on this condition; the linear negative influence of dietary cation anion difference (dcad) on the incidence of milk fever regardless of urinary ph or the target level of dietary dcad achieved; the inflammatory response associated with subacute rumen acidosis and its effect on feed intake; an increased awareness of the potential for antioxidant status to improve immunity and health in the transition period; the development of more standardised diagnostic criteria and treatment protocols for .  while prepartum dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in .  given that all cows experience a reduced feed intake and body con-dition infection and inflammation of the uterus after calving there is a need for furtherresearch on the immunology of transition .  green (1997) reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (crc) which delivers 335 mg per day significantly reduced the concentrations of bhba and increased those .  these hormonal changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi but also coordinate the metabolic changes that favor if not force the mobilization of body fat reserves from adipocytes .  however most transition cow diseases have a range of severity and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd1213-35 the consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health reproduction and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease6’26-32 non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (bhb) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the .  as the amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid .  of the three major subclinical metabolic diseases the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis which is common and associated with significant .  when states of hypocalcemia neb or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their .  any animal with a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l is considered positive and should receive 300 ml of propylene glycol (pg) for .  fat supplementation in transition dietconjugated linoleic acids (cla) are a family of at least28 isomers of linoleic acid .  based on the average feed intakes observed in this trial the low monensin group received approximately 208 mg of monensin per day and the high group 399 mg .  appropriate and timely coordination of these ca regulation mediators is essential as milk fever results when blood and extracellular ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation resulting in insufficient ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency .  reist et al (2003) used milk acetone at 04 mmol/l and serum bhba at 2300 umol/l and found significantly reduced milk yield at both cutpoints and increased the risk of endometritis at the milk .  difficulties with pdi provision will also arise where straw or low protein forages might be included in the diet of the .  propylene glycol has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (emery et al 1964; sauer et .  however the authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause .  impaired immune function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis .  to be reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density .  propylene glycol requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (sauer et .  nonethelessmore fermentable carbohydrates such as starch non-forage fiber and highly digestible forages should be fedlater in lactation when plasma nefa and bhba decreaseincreasing the ruminal starch availability in a diet contain-ing adequate physically effective ndf fed during the first2–3 months may improve milk yield .  relative effects of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of .  duffield and geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of bhba at or above .  slowly injecting 05 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite chloride or borogluconate provide 15 to 4 g .  there are many theories on why non-structural carbohydrate should be fed to late pregnant dry cows such as developing rumen papillae acclimatizing rumen microbes and avoiding .  different problems are caused by rumen acidosis depending on the quantity of acids that accumulate in .  one of the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone acetoacetate ß-hydroxybutyrate [bhb]) and their release into .  for clinical application primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin e

11 metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
a retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) β-hydroxybutyrate (bhba) glucose and calcium (ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (da) clinical ketosis and culling in .  there isa link between feed intake and subsequent developmentof metritis (huzzey et al .  additionally potassium is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in .  dohoo and martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four .  when this system is out of balance hypocalcemia can result1415 occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (dmi) that occurs in the periparturient period which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy .  these diets may work by controlling overall energy intake by cows and thereby prevent metabolic changes similar to those that develop in .  the role of minerals in the diet contributing to dcad can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full dcad strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms for this to work the dcad value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time .  body condition and energy intake dairy cows like other mammals undergo a normal cycle of body energy storage and mobilization with increased body fat storage during mid-gestation and increased body fat mobilization during .  the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins .  diets with a net energy for lactation greater than 165 mcal/kg were associated with increased risk for displacement of abomasum (cameron et .  fat or lipid deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as nefa plus the glycerol backbone of .  this may be the result of a reduced energy supply since milk protein percent is positively associated with net .  the cows were under clinical observation from calving until 60 days in milk (dim) and during this time there were 22 cases of da 31 cases of clinical ketosis and 39 cows .  the general concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for .  transition cows in particular face the chal-lenge of negative energy balance (neb) and/or disproportional energy metabolism (fattyliver ketosis subacute acute ruminal acidosis); disturbed mineral utilization (milk feversub-clinical hypocalcemia); and perturbed immune function (retained .  nutrientdemands in late pregnancy are in part met by an increasedstate of insulin resistance in adipose tissue and musclecoupled with an increased sensitivity to lipolytic agents(bell 1995) which reduce peripheral glucose uptake andfacilitate nutrient flow away from maternal stores .  while prepartum dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in .  several aspects of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations affect dry matter intake and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient .  for example milk fever or subclinical hypocalcemia can lead to loss of muscular tonicity resulting in an increased risk of retained placenta and/or displaced abomasums in spite of retained placenta being classified as a problem related to the .  when formulating diets to prevent displaced abomasa several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber maximization of dry matter intake and limiting the energy density of .  3 elevated non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to .  while dietary fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (grum et al 1996; douglas et al 2004 2006) the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (douglas et .  peak incidence occurs at 5 days in milk and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week .  the further demand for glucose after calvingoften leads to a fall in circulating insulin in early lactationgenetic selection for milk production has also been associ-ated with a decline in circulating insulin levels (taylor .  carbohydrates include both fiber (ndf) and non-fiber .  thus oral ca administration is the preferred route of ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood .  bell (1995) estimated that the daily demands for fetal and placental growth in the last 3 wk of gestation are 360 g of metabolizable protein and 3 to 5 mcal of .  based on high correlations between dmi 1 d before calving and dmi at 21 d after calving (grummer 1995) a major focus on maximizing prepartum dmi has developed in .  in a more recent study we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases such as metritis and also improved fertility (barragan et .  the association between milk fat and hyperketonemia is presumably because of increased availability of bhba and fatty acids for milk .  the most common compositions include calcium chloride calcium sulfate and calcium carbonate which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent 70 per cent and 50 per cent in dairy .  prevention should therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry .  dry matter intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (bw) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 14 % bw in the 7 to 10 d period .  (1998) fed 50 multiparous and 25 primigravid holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 .  more recently we showed that intravenous glucose administration (fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower bhb concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (mann and .  in addition the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta metritis endometritis and mastitis41 as with these disease outcomes increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on .  this paper reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds) (3) treatment approaches for affected cows and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative .  further-more given the interplay between the immune endocrineand metabolic systems (stofkova 2009; pittman 2011)diminished immune competence at calving increases hostsusceptibility to infections (trevisi et al 2011)physiological conditions associated with insufficientenergy supply predispose dairy cows to metabolic andmicrobial diseases such as milk fever endometritis keto-sis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (drackley1999; duffield and .  as described above controlling energy intake of close-up cows so that they meet but do not dramatically exceed their energy requirements during this period is a .  in irish data mcnamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four .  the increased energy intake resulted in less mobilization of adipose tissue as parturition approached and lowered plasma .  high potassium as is found in many grass silages is implicated in the dietary cation anion difference (dcad) or in simple terms high potassium induces a state of .  this could be 2kg of a dry cow nut 2kg of barley or 3kg of maize silage or whole .  13 minimizing subclinical metabolic diseases in dairy cows

most periparturient abnormalities have some metabolic element as a component of the cause of .  subclinical ketosis is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases lost milk production reduced reproductive performance and increased .  logically reduction of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever ketosis metritis and retained placenta) will reduce the risk .  we counsel 10 to 20% on the top screen 50 to 60% in the middle and < 40% in the bottom pan with the long straw or hay particles not more than .  this poses an enormous challenge for the liver that has to synthesize all of this glucose from propionate and amino acids as well as a challenge for other tissues and organs that have to adapt to a reduction of .  manipulation of the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) and postpartum .  milk fever is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by .  circulating concentration of lep-tin is strongly correlated to body condition score (bcs)and falls in late pregnancy (ehrhardt et al 2000; watheset .  opportunities to improve transition cow management hypocalcemia neb and immune dysfunction are related; while all occur to some extent during the transition period our goal as managers is to minimize the severity and duration of .  consistent with these effectsincubation of ruminant hepatocytes in vitro demonstrateda potential role of linolenic acid in decreasing cellularaccumulation of triglycerides from palmitic acid (masheket .  the incidence of subclinical ketosis defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/l) was reduced by 50% and blood bhba levels were reduced by 40% for the high .  if the ration is changed abruptly at calving the capacity of the rumen flora to metabolize lactate the principal acid responsible for acute rumen acidosis is at a minimum at the initiation .  metabolic alkalosis can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate .  one of the important challenges facing the dairy industry is the development implementation and economic assessment of practical integrated blueprints of best practice for prevention of the production diseases and other diseases of the .  to fulfil the glucose needs as well as other nutrient requirements the physiological adaptation of the cow allows for alternative sources of energy and amino acids to be used that stem from adipose and muscle .  dietary fat because of its high energy density supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the .  even in herds with very low milk fever incidence subclinical hypocalcemia [sch) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential5'25 36 as these associations continue to be understood the need for strategies to reduce sch incidence is becoming .  the combina-tion of lack of adaptation of the rumen to concentrates and ahigh concentrate intake around parturition against a back-drop of general low feed intake may lead to developmentof sara in the .  we advise administration of one dose of oral ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium with a second of oral ca dose given 12 to 24 .  cows fed the high energy diet had about 25 times the insulin concentrations as cows fed to meet nrc (2001) energy requirements during the dry period with similar glucose concentrations and serum nefa that were suppressed only .  little scientific information is available for the fiber requirements of dry cows to maintain adequate rumen health and minimize the incidence of displacement .  elevated bhba concentrations above 1000 μmol/l increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (duffield 1997; geishauser et al 1997 leblanc et .  the requirement for the development of rumen papillae and to acclimatise rumen microbes for dry cows coming off a grass silage-based diet and receiving 4kg or less of concentrate feed in a grazing scenario is unlikely to be significant if bcs is .  these hor-monal changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi butalso promote metabolic changes that favor the mobilizationof body fat reserves from adipocytes (drackley et al 2005;ingvartsen 2006)the transient temperature elevation in transition cows(>395◦c) in the days following calving is mainly due tocommon malaise conditions linked to inflammation andthe release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as a tumornecrosis factor alpha (tnf-) interleukins 1 and 6 (il-1and il-6) (trevisi et .  to maximize dry matter intake diet composition — especially fiber and energy concentrations —is one of the most .  leblanc et al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/l bhba in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an .  based on the above data it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum bhba should start at about .  subclinicalendometritis has been defined as the presence of leuko-cytes mainly pmns within the uterine lumen but withoutclinical signs of endometritis (földi et al 2006; sheldonet al 2006b; chapwanya 2008)there is recent evidence that endometritis is associatedwith reduced feed intake severe negative energy bal-ance and disturbed immune function (urton et al 2005;hammon et al 2006; huzzey et .  metabolic and physiological changes during thetransition period: inflammation energy balanceendocrine changes and immunosuppressionthe primary challenge faced by cows is a suddenincrease of nutrient requirements for milk productionat a time when dry matter intake (dmi) and nutri-ent supply .  the enormous and immediate requirement of calcium (ca) for colostrum and milk production paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition creates a large ca deficit that takes days .  consideration should be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol .  the metabolic disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum .  occasionally cows with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs such as licking and .  this situation leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (sara) and contributes to reduced dmi and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early .  the local microbial population needed tometabolize the lactic acid arising from the fermentationof abundant carbohydrates lags behind thus disturbingthe balance between production and absorption of fermen-tation end products (nordlund et al 1995; nagaraja .  similarly the concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only .  in a study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves postpartum fever retained placenta metritis and decreased .  dry matter intake regulation of dmi during the periparturient period is complex and largely not understood (ingvartsen and andersen 2000; grummer et .   association with periparturient disease several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and .  the main goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress .  however several studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes increased mobilization of body tissue increased circulating concentrations of nefa and bhb and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and .  we suggest lactational incidences of das < 3% clinical milk fever < 2% and retained fetal membranes of .  the safest way to assess this to guarantee feed availability is to use the feed bunk .  advances in periparturient nutrition and management strategies have decreased the occurrence of clinical hypocalcemia over the past few decades; however subclinical hypocalcemia remains an important aspect of transition .  therefore grass and concentrate allowances should also be compared to the cows energy requirement using the .  although diets high in nonfibrous carbohydrates improve energy status of transition cows provision of adequate amounts of physically effective ndf is important to maintain rumen fill thereby helping in the prevention of displacement .  evidence for this phenomenon includes the classic study by garnsworthy and topps (1982) and our own recent data (douglas et al 2006) showing that cows that are forced away from their desired body condition (either fatter or thinner) before calving eventually converge to a similar body condition score by 4 to 8 wk .  the ability to partition available energy for milk production early in lactation (bauman and currie 1980) has made the role of energy balance a key factor in the study of milk production reproductive performance and .  results—high serum concentrations of cholesterol and fas were associated with an increased odds .  at the same time animals often show a substantial decrease in dry .  ketosis and fatty liver syndromeketosis is the imbalanced use of body fat by acow common in early lactation and is characterized byhypoglycemia and hyperketonemia (kehrli et al 2006)insufficient blood glucose levels induce a decline in plasmainsulin and mobilization of triacylglycerol deposits asnefa (block and .  cows fed a tmr with sfc during the last 4 wk of gestation consumed more energy than cows fed a tmr .  clinical hypocalcaemia commonly referred to as milk fever was first described in 1793 which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase .  the negative associations between subclinical ketosis health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health .  hypocalcemia results when serum calcium concentration falls faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands .  thus the requirement for concentrate in the dry cow diet of most irish cows (ca 5000l of milk 400kg f and p) should be driven primarily by concerns about bcs and .  this decrease in insulin combined with a decrease in sensitivity of adipose tissue to insulin and the increase in somatotropin results in a decrease in the synthesis of triglycerides in adipose and favors their mobilization (bell 1995; lanna and .  while fermentation of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for .  nearly 50% ofthe lda cases are accompanied by neb (heuer 2000)bhba and aspartate aminotransferase (asat) activity inthe blood both parameters associated with neb of post-partum cows may be used to predict the development oflda (geishauser et .  based on current literature and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to .  in a recently reported commercial field trial (sanchez et al 2003) cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (p < 010) for fewer incidents of milk fever displaced abomasum mastitis and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of .  in addition the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated .  plasma glucose concentrations tended to be higher and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous .  in one of our studies we found that cows that experienced a difficult calving had an elevated inflammatory response in the days after calving and subsequently a higher risk of developing diseases compared to cows that experienced a .  for example in the case of mastitis herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded all gram-negative cases might not be recorded and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would .  milk fever is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted .  given that lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch] microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 22 to 44 lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation .  based on the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase nfc in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to vfa to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer tmr to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed) and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the .  monensin treatment in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 .  negative energy balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to .  cows fed either ration ad libitum gained about 02 body condition score units during the dry period whereas restricted cows lost about 05 body condition units from dry-off .  12 evaluation of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

objective—to identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables as measured in the week before parturition that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (rp) in .  elevated concentrations of bhba were associated with da clinical ketosis .  cows fed a tmr with sfc during the postpartum period consumed more energy and produced more milk with lower fat and mun contents than cows .  overconditioned cows lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (reid et .  a subsequent canadian study conducted in 45 dairy herds confirmed that monensin crc reduces the incidence of displaced abomasum (duffield et .  a 14-week dry period) cows fed average quality grass silage (68 dmd) should have an increase in bcs of approximately 05 units .  bulky rations with the forage base consisting of either straw or mature low-potassium hay blended with corn silage and a grain mix can be easily sorted by cows if the straw or hay is not chopped ideally prior to mixing into .  glucose demands can exceed the gluconeogenic capacity of the liver; for example in the immediate postpartum period when the need for glucose supply for lactose production .  12 monitoring and managing energy balance in the transition dairy cow

dairy cattle are at an increased risk for many diseases and disorders during early .  as an example thin vs obese dry cows will have different dynamics in fat metabolism dmi patterns and nutrient needs both pre- .  in particular supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa) to the intestine might .  most of the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid amino acids and the glycerol liberated .  the odds of clinical ketosis were 63 times greater in cows with serum nefa ⩾ 10 mmol/l in the first week .  rogers and hope-cawdery (1980) first described the beneficial effects of monensin for reducing the incidence of ketosis in a herd with a clinical .  production diseases of the dairy cow are caused by a level of production inconsistent with nutrient intake provision of an inadequate diet an unsuitable environment an inappropriate breeding policy or various combinations of .  hypocalcemia and hyperketonemia as mentioned above have an effect on proper immune function thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or .  at the cow level the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum bhb > 06 to 08 mmol/l; pre-partum nefa > 03 to 05 meq/l; post-partum nefa > 07 to 1 m eq/l; and post-partum bhb > 10 to 14 mmol/l27 at the herd level negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above6-32 herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes33 an initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere33 eg test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to .  further diseases like da retained fetal membranes and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and .  major minerals trace elements and vitamins are also important and the dry cow diet should include a specific dry .  data from ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the prepartum period which clearly indicated that dmi was compromised in these animals32 furthermore nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the .  both subclinical ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk .  increasing starch also tends to improve total dmi diet digestibility and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (grummer 1995) at least over the short-term in the .  we typically target energy intake of cows during the close-up period at 110 to 130% of .  treatment with dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher bhb concentrations in a study involving four herds (tatone and .  randomised controlled trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment .  concentration of plasma progesterone which is high in gestation rapidly falls at calving and there is a transitory elevation in estrogens and glucocorticoids in the .  however the transition cow is likely to be in a state of lipolysis predominantly because of her energy balance status and her hormonal profile (low insulin and high cortisol) that does not favor body .  it occurs because the energy demands for early lactation milk production cannot be completely met by .  in-line milk analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical neb disorders .  a potentialrole for methionine in bovine ketosis has been speculatedfor more than 30 years (mccarthy et al 1968; watermanand .  given that the occurrence of diseases inperiparturient cows center on the three principal axes ofdisproportional energy metabolism disturbed mineral uti-lization and perturbed immune function there is a needfor further research to identify ways of regulating immuneresponses for preventing transition diseasesbecause the disorders mentioned above are interrelatedand can occur as a complex in one animal or in a herd herdhealth management strategies designed to prevent thesediseases are .  displaced abomasum (da) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left da (lda) side in cattle with lda being more frequently diagnosed than .  sufficient nonfiber carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression .  consequently neb and reduced dry matter intake .  it seems logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets especially when fed as total mixed rations (tmr) should help maintain dmi around calving and promote more rapid increases in dmi after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum .  from the discussion above it is obvious that preventing the decline in dmi prepartum increasing dmi rapidly postpartum and making certain that energy density is as high as possible in both transition phases are the most important control points for .  it seems logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets especially when fed as a total mixed ration (tmr) should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum .  this release of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies acetone acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate .  cows fed steam-flaked corn had lower blood urea n concentrations during the prepartum period and lower plasma nonesterified fatty acid concentrations during the prepartum and .  various components of cow health including infectious and metabolic diseases physical form and composition of diets during the transition period and cow comfort are factors linked to the pathogenesis .  it was suggested thatoptimizing dmi requires different diets at different stagesof the lactation because dmi is controlled by oxidationof fuels (fatty acids propionate lactate and amino acids)in the liver in early lactation and by gut fill as lactationapproaches peak (allen et .  the study indicated that early post-partum serum bhba nefa and ca concentrations have potential as indicators of disease and culling risk in .  in our experiments liver slices from overfed cows had a lower capacity for oxidation of fatty acids and greater esterification capacity compared with cows fed the lower energy diet (litherland et .  thin cows have been proven to have a significantly increased risk of lameness uterine health issues and retained .  it is unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to .  no milk production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest bhba concentrations and were at decreased risk of .  overall there were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta clinical mastitis metritis endometritis ketosis displaced abomasum .  another fundamental player in milk fever prevention .  a significant body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine .  access to clean water is essential and an adequate area where cows can drink that is sufficient for the size of the dry cow area fresh drinking water is essential to maximise .  the first key area already addressed in the control of milk fever is the control of body condition score maintaining bcs in the desired range at calving is a fundamental point in preventing .  however herd level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management feed quality and nutritional programs cow comfort environment and other variables that influence dry .  1 monitoring negative energy balance in transition cows for better dairy herd results

introduction 

most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (neb) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (hayirli et .  mean annual milk fat yield was significantly higher in both subclinically ketotic and clinically ketotic cows compared to normal cows .  dairy operations large and small continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases .  methionine and lysine are frequently con-sidered to be the most limiting amino acids for synthesis ofmilk and milk protein (national research council 2001)these two amino acids also have potential roles in mito-chondrial b-oxidation of fatty acids (carnitine biosynthesis)in liver and export of triglycerides as vldl (apolipopro-tein b100 biosynthesis) (bauchart et .  the current working hypothesis under investigation in our laboratory is that extended periods of feeding diets high in starch and/or total energy to dairy cows during late gestation induce changes analogous to insulin resistance in other species even in the absence of .  their analysis revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta milk fever .  tao and dahl reviewed the literature related to heat stress and the implementation of heat abatement strategies during the transition period and the effects on the dam and the calf44 their summary suggests remarkably consistent and beneficial results of heat abatement both on the subsequent performance of the dam and also the calf through its .  the key areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management negative energy balance hypocalcaemia rumen health and trace .  (2000) reported that elevated glucose concentrations such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for .  however there is much variation in the magnitude of the neb after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (garnsworthy 1989) the severity of the depression in dmi (bertics et al 1992) the quality of the ration .  although immediate therapy is imperative to prevent progression to death it is important to note that additional ca is required to counter the ca deficit until the cow returns to normal .  by formulating high-bulk tmr that will limit total energy intake but provide adequate amounts of protein and other nutrients cows can be allowed to consume feed ad libitum and meet their requirements while preventing overconsumption .  as has been well-documented previously and supported by recent research30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated nefa concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders lower milk production and poorer .  that is ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead .  although numbers of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density .  however difficulty arises if either the pdin or the pdie value of grass silage is less than 60g/kg .  partial dcad is another option for control of milk fever if .  in addition the odds ratio decreased from 07 at 1100 umol/l bhba to 031 at 1900 umol/l bhba implying in a sense a dose effect of .  the use of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol and ionophores may also aid in the prevention .  approaches to reducing the prevalence of low serum calcium include reducing potassium in feedstuffs precalving and adding chlorinated supplements to the .  the tissues produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to nefa .  re¬ search in post-partum systemic inflammatory response and the effects on health and productivity in transition dairy cows has yet to clarify to what extent and persistency inflammation should be considered a normal adaptive response4 from a management perspective overcrowding comingling of fresh heifers and mature cows competition at the feedbunk excessive pathogen pressure heat stress and stressful handling situations all affect the ability of the transition cow's immune system to adequately react to .  common metabolic problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of .  if dietary nfc increases abruptly at calving with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates the amount of vfa produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of vfa in .  dietary carbohydrates adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function prevent displaced abomasum and achieve .  there are a huge number of factors that determine energy allowance for example feed space weather grazing conditions and silage qualities are .  a negative energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta metritis and mastitis through impaired .  over the last 2 decades much intensive research has been completed in addressing transition cows relative to nutrient requirements physiologic adaptations and metabolic associations with periparturient disease; yet dairy farms continue to be plagued by high prevalence of costly fresh cow disorders adversely affecting productivity and reproductive performance .  evidence from our group and miner institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in .  the somatotropin in concert with elevated cortisol stimulates the liver to produce .  in the first week after calving cows with serum bhba ⩾ 1000 μmol/l had 136 times greater odds of developing da than cows with .  in farms with aggressive fresh cow programs incidence of displacement of abomasum is below 2% of the total cows calving per year and these herds can feed prepartum diets with less than 35% ndf therefore higher .  carbohydrate formulation of the prepartum dieta concept that has been perpetuated through the sci-entific literature (rabelo et al 2003) is that diets higherin non- fiber carbohydrates (nfc) content than traditionaldry cow diets must be fed prior to calving to promotedevelopment of ruminal papillae for adequate absorptionof volatile fatty acids produced during .  although other feeding standards organisations (nrc 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the pdi allowances research work carried out in ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage .  the metabolites non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (bhb) are common measures of neb and/or ketosis in transition animals (duffield et .  this combination creates a negative .  this makes perfect sense in that the liver is producing lipoproteins for other tissues and should not be able to extract them from the blood when it has an alternative i e nefa as an .  during this period cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between .  by measuring the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can .  fat accumulation may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis which in turn may predispose cows to other .  the sub-clinical form of acidosis (sara) is present in a large numberof dairy cows with impaired immune function (krause .  these energy densities are adjusted based upon actual dmi of cows on farms to achieve the overall targets for energy intake during the close-up period .  however data from burke et al (2010) for new zealand dairy cows indicates that feeding nonfibrous carbohydrate in the late pregnant dairy cow diet had no effect on reproduction in grazing .  a topdress of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect bhba nefa liver glycogen or .  glucose is an equally important energy source for the ovary and the reduced glucose availability in the beginning of lactation can negatively impact the re-establishment of ovarian activity after calving (rabiee et .  in addition the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (bhb) and .  the principal metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver ketosis subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever sub-clinical hypocalcemia udder edema); and problems related to the immune system (retained placenta .  the most consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis and .  because dmi of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total .  we advise hyperketonemia (defined as bhb concentration >12 mmol/l) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for .  dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (hayirli et al 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum due to milk production the demands for glucose amino acids and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements .  cows with serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 18 mmol/l and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 30 times and cows with serum bhba concentrations above 1400 umol/l were 14 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (duffield et al 2005)  thresholds for defining subclinical disease most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease .  most prepartum diets contain between 30 to 40% ndf and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the .  furthermore supplemental fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation .  these positive responses in production do not appear to relatedirectly to effects of methionine and lysine on hepaticlipid or glucose metabolism (bertics and grummer 1999;piepenbrink et al 2004; socha et .  during both the prepartum and postpartum transition period cows require more energy than they are able to consume resulting in the neb and the concomitant loss of body weight (condition) to supply the necessary energy even in healthy cows .  in another large study including cows from 20 herds the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (seifi and .  the key concept is to strive to meet the requirements of cows for energy and all other nutrients but to not allow cows to exceed their requirements for energy by consuming large amounts for the duration of the .  post-calving the ideal window for herd monitoring for neb is in the days 15-50 in milk post calving the thresholds are different and nefa >07mmol/l and bhb >14mmol/l are indicative .  alternatively differences in peak occurrence for subclinical ketosis may reflect differences in etiology with early lactation occurrence reflecting suboptimal dry cow management and expression of fatty liver while later occurrences may indicate deficiencies in lactating cow management (cook et .  when consumed at a typical consumption level by dry cows (18 to 20% of body weight; butler et al 2011) some grass silages will provide an insufficient amount of energy for pregnant dry cows and some will provide too .  considering the mg deficit of a cow exhibiting hypomagnesaemic tetany it is usually estimated that the immediate intravenous administration of 15 to 225 g of mg is required to normalise blood mg concentration .  other practices that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with .  while neb is a physiologically normal process excessive neb reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects .  hypocalcemia impacts a large proportion of cows post-partum15-36 in a study including 55 dairy herds across the united states herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service6 with such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a .  there was a 5% relative increase in the odds of rp for each 01 mmol/l increase in cholesterol or fas concentration in the week .  negative energy balance fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome clinical ketosis and .  the diet was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins .  feeding a high nonfirbrous carbohydrate diet prepartum increased dry matter and energy intake which improved energy balance of cows throughout the .  immediately after calving cows experience large changes in nutrient demands and many metabolic adaptations occur to maintain homeorhesis1 of foremost interest are the adaptive mechanisms to maintain calcium and .  key areas of management to optimize post-partum health production and reproduction dairy herds vary widely in the degree to which they achieve success in maintaining excellent health both in terms of clinical and subclinical health disorders high milk yield during early lactation and return to estrous cycling with high fertility in the .  use of a prepartum “vfa load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered vfa concentrations and ph in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (andersen et al 1999) and did not positively affect dmi or milk production postpartum (ingvartsen et .  a pooled summary of the two canadian projects showed that monensin crc reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by .  overfeeding high-starch rations (high in corn silage and grains) during the entire dry period is detrimental to cow performance and .  these proceedings will discuss the di¬ agnostic tools available to bovine practitioners for individual animal calcium concentration determination and herd-level monitoring as well as current developments in the epidemiology of hypocalcemia and .  complete oxidation ofnefa generates the metabolite acetyl coenzyme a thatcan be used to generate energy via the .  during the closeup period (3 wk before parturition) cows that previously had overconsumed energy during the far-off dry period had greater nefa concentrations (323 vs 230 µmol/l) than cows previously fed to meet .  thus postpartum inflammation exacer-bates negative energy status (trevisi et al 2007 2010)while carbohydrate insufficiency increases production ofnon-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and ketone bodies in theliver (duffield and herdt 2000; drackley et .  now we cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through .  a significant decrease in nefa bhba and glucose was noted in the .  therefore the clinical signs will not disappear until the csf mg concentration increases usually about 1 hour after the iv administration of mg because the blood-brain barrier decreases the diffusion of mg during this time it is important not to stimulate the animals to rise in order to avoid the initiation of a .  increasing the energy density of the prepartum diet with grains equivocally affects the risk .  da is a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation .  additionally the type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (whelan et al 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein .  within three weeks of the onset of lactation milkyield milk proteins fat and lactose increase rapidly andexceed feed intake (bertoni et .  an increase in dietary gluco-genic nutrients (27% starch) in grass and corn silage-baseddiets fed through 9 wk postpartum improved energy sta-tus assessed by calculated energy balance plasma nefaand bhba concentrations and liver triglyceride contentbut did not affect dmi or milk yield (van knegsel .  the positive effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis which might have positive effects on .  the early postpar-tum period is considered to be the major risk periodbecause hypocalcemia metritis negative energy balanceand nutritional factors play a central role in the patho-genesis of lda .  the typical decrease in dmi before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and nel by about 2 percentage units and 084 mj/kg of dm respectively in the .  limiting dietary starchcontent and starch fermentability may increase dmi inearly lactation since there is less rapid production andabsorption of propionate (allen et .  delivering a consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced .  therefore to pre-vent ketosis and fatty liver syndrome it is necessary to avoidexcessive weight loss in the .  physiological and pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (duffield et al 2002) and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (dohoo and martin 1984; kremer et .  in several studies oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (mcart and others 2011 mcart and others 2012a tatone and others 2016a gordon and .  this approach was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver and control blood .  serum nefa and bhba concentrations during week 1 were associated with the subsequent occurrence of .  nutrient requirements ofthe fetus reach maximal levels three weeks prepartumyet dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by .  many thresholds used for subclinical hypocalcemia and ketosis are based on reference values where the limit is set at above or below a 95% .  no treatment effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake body weight and body condition score .  grass dry matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg dm depending on the time .  to our knowledge no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and .  at parturition cows were assigned to a postpartum total mixed ration that contained either cracked corn or .  regardless of the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of .  often addition of water or another wet ingredient to decrease the ration dry matter into the 46 to 48% range is also required for optimal effectiveness of .  a severe neb in the transition period can aid in the development of metabolic diseases prolong the interval between calving and first ovulation and .  procedures—serum concentrations of fatty acids (fas) β-hydroxybutyrate cholesterol glucose urea and calcium and blood leukocyte neutrophil lymphocyte monocyte and eosinophil counts .  our research group has been interested in the potential use of supplemental fat during the dry period to restore body condition to thin cows and as a possible .  treatment options for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol and ancillary treatments such as administration of b-vitamins choline .  a dose of propylene glycol of 1l per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased bhba and nefa and increased glucose concentrations (studer et .  role of feed additives in addition to good nutrition certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when .  high producing cows postpartum will react differently to supplemental nutrients in the pre- and postpartum periods from lower producing cows as their needs metabolic processes and dmi differ from .  treating sck cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put .  these include macromineral nutrition energy nutrition and protein and amino .  abomasal displacement is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult .  to maintain calcium concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone decreases calcium excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption .  if dmi is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference metabolic problems may get worse rather .  cows with concentrations of bhba at or above1400 µmol/l in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement .  herds with more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of nefas and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events poorer reproduction and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative .  duffield et al (1998b) reported that monensin crc administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence prevalence and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd .  here were to: 1 identify critical thresholds above which nefa and bhb concentrations increase the risk of disease and affect production and reproductive performance at the individual animal level; 2 investigate the magnitude of these associations in free-stall tmr-fed herds; 3 evaluate herd-level outcomes associated with the proportion of animals sampled which were above nefa and bhb critical thresholds; 4 evaluate sampling schemes to estimate herd level outcomes; 5 intensively measure the incidence of early lactation subclinical ketosis in high performing herds; 6 identify dry period risk factors for cows that develop ketosis; and 7 evaluate the cost: benefit of various testing schemes for subclinical ketosis and subsequent treatment of positive cows with propylene glycol .  each mastitis treatment were entered as a mastitis event the true incidence of mastitis would be grossly overestimated .  demonstrated that even in regions of grazing cows where milk fever is well controlled that up to 33% of cows may suffer from subclinical hypocalcaemia .  silage quality is poor cows may lose bcs in the dry period .  even subcutaneous ca can result in a rebound hypocalcaemia 24 hours after administration (box 1) and thus repeated administration of intravenous or subcutaneous ca are counterproductive (blanc and others 2014 domino and others 2017) .  as an inciting or predisposing cause of abomasal displacement can be further supported by several recent papers .  support both the subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis temporal association and the negative impact on milk production .  common the ucd herd health group have encountered problems where occasionally some farms may feed the same mineral to milking and dry cows inadvertently or push the milking cow total mixed ration (tmr) in to dry cows this is important to look at as the level of calcium for example will be entirely different and can be very dangerous with regard to milk fever control .  matter intake (dmi) and maintenance of a consistent intake through the last three weeks prior to calving is likely the hallmark of a successful transition cow program .  cows for 8 weeks starting at calving with either 3% or 6% propylene glycol in a concentrate mixture significantly reduced the incidence of positive milk ketone tests (fisher et al 1973) .  two main practices that stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat — feed push-ups and feed delivery frequency .  necessary for all muscle and nerve function and is especially important during the immediate periparturient period for colostrum synthesis and uterine contraction during parturition1 these processes place a large drain on maternal calcium post-partum and a coordinated hormonal response is necessary to maintain calcium homeostasis and support high levels of milk production .  at 30 grams per ton of total ration (high group) decreased the incidence of subclinical ketosis and significantly reduced blood bhba levels in the first three weeks postpartum (sauer et al 1989) .  of ndf and nfc in the transition period (both pre and postpartum) is a key factor to maximizing dmi .  reviews testing of neb-related metabolites and current research on the epidemiology of subclinical ketosis (sck) individual animal and herd consequences treatment and economic considerations associated with poor adaptation to neb in dairy cows .  are: high bcs at calving; excessive weight loss; elevated plasma nefa (cameron et al 1998); reduced dmi in the transition period (constable et al 1992); and reduced forage-to-grain ratio (shaver 1997) .  in

increased mobilization of adipose tissue manifested as the release of non-esterified fatty acid (nefa) into circulation to be metabolized by the liver and other tissues and incorporated into milk fat in the mammary gland2-11 the formation of ketone bodies (bhb acetoacetate and acetone) in the liver provides an alternative fuel source for body tissues11 however when there is excessive ketone body formation hyperketonemia can result16’26 higher dmi post-partum generally results in lower circulating nefa and bhb and has been associated with improved health performance and less severe post-partum neb18 optimizing dmi during this post¬ partum period is especially important to provide sufficient energy to support cow health and production .  (milk fever] affects approximately 2 to 5% of periparturient dairy cattle1 this disease results in weakness that can progress to recumbency and death and is a widely accepted risk factor for subsequent displaced abomasum ketosis metritis retained placenta mastitis culling and decreased milk production2-4 traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration traditionally subclinical hypocalcemia (sch] has been defined as a serum calcium concentration .  of this increase in nefa is obligatory and is under hormonal control while another portion is the result of an energy deficit (negative energy balance or neb) (bertics et al 1992; grummer 1995; dyk and emery 1996) .  of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5) .  feeds such as soybean hulls beet pulp corn gluten feed and wheat middlings that are highly digestible also can improve total energy intake .  aim to optimize dry matter intake (dmi)increase the energy density of the diets without sacrificingrumen function and maintain body condition score at 35on the 1–5 scale at calving are recommended (macdonaldand roche 2004)32 .  and energy intake provide hay or grass silage that is low in protein and withdraw concentrates .  as discussed above likely is a function of additional long-chain fatty acids benefiting cows when body fat is not being mobilized intensively but further imbalancing the mixture of metabolic fuels and substrates present during the periparturient period (drackley 1999) .  to feed delivery frequency research has shown that when performed often up to four times a day this practice will stimulate cows to go to the feed bunk and eat .  high plasma nefa contribute to the developmentof fatty liver syndrome which in turn is a contributing factorto other health concerns and periparturient immunosup-pression in the postpartum period (lacetera et al 2005;kehrli et al 2006) .  in understanding of production diseases include the emergence of propylene glycol and rumen protected choline as the supplements of choice for preventing fatty liver and the absence of any preventative effect of increased energy density in the close-up dry period diet on this condition; the linear negative influence of dietary cation anion difference (dcad) on the incidence of milk fever regardless of urinary ph or the target level of dietary dcad achieved; the inflammatory response associated with subacute rumen acidosis and its effect on feed intake; an increased awareness of the potential for antioxidant status to improve immunity and health in the transition period; the development of more standardised diagnostic criteria and treatment protocols for uterine infection .  dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in body condition .  all cows experience a reduced feed intake and body con-dition infection and inflammation of the uterus after calving there is a need for furtherresearch on the immunology of transition dairy cows .  reported that administration 3 wk prior to expected calving of a monensin controlled release capsule (crc) which delivers 335 mg per day significantly reduced the concentrations of bhba and increased those of glucose .  changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi but also coordinate the metabolic changes that favor if not force the mobilization of body fat reserves from adipocytes (grummer 1995) .  transition cow diseases have a range of severity and the clinical manifestation of a disease only represents a small portion ofwhat truly exists in a herd1213-35 the consequences associated with the subclinical form of these disease states have numerous negative subsequent health reproduction and production penalties that are not accounted for if we only monitor clinical disease6’26-32 non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and (3-hydroxybutyrate (bhb) are energy metabolites that can be used as markers of excessive negative energy balance in dairy cows during the transition period .  amylolytic bacteria also generate lactic acid their decrease is accompanied by a decrease in the bacteria that utilize lactic acid (goff 1999) .  three major subclinical metabolic diseases the most published information currently exists for subclinical ketosis which is common and associated with significant economic loss .  of hypocalcemia neb or immune function imbalance are severe and last for an extended period of time they can lead to disease states with negative downstream productive and reproductive consequences that impede cows from reaching their full potential .  with a bhb concentration > 12 mmol/l is considered positive and should receive 300 ml of propylene glycol (pg) for 5 days .  in transition dietconjugated linoleic acids (cla) are a family of at least28 isomers of linoleic acid (banni 2002) .  the average feed intakes observed in this trial the low monensin group received approximately 208 mg of monensin per day and the high group 399 mg per day .  timely coordination of these ca regulation mediators is essential as milk fever results when blood and extracellular ca concentrations fall faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation resulting in insufficient ca for normal bodily functions and weakness that can progress to recumbency and death .  al (2003) used milk acetone at 04 mmol/l and serum bhba at 2300 umol/l and found significantly reduced milk yield at both cutpoints and increased the risk of endometritis at the milk acetone threshold .  pdi provision will also arise where straw or low protein forages might be included in the diet of the dry cow .  has been used successfully for the prevention of subclinical ketosis (emery et al 1964; sauer et al 1973) .  authors argued that since metritis is a condition which normally develops at calving subclinical ketosis is more likely a result rather than a cause of metritis .  function either through reduced energy or by direct effects of ketones on white blood cells are likely the reason for effects on infectious disease such as metritis and mastitis .  reesterified by the liver into triglycerides and exported as triglycerides incorporated into very low density lipoproteins (vldl) .  requires repeated daily oral administration and sodium propionate may reduce feed intake (sauer et al 1989) .  carbohydrates such as starch non-forage fiber and highly digestible forages should be fedlater in lactation when plasma nefa and bhba decreaseincreasing the ruminal starch availability in a diet contain-ing adequate physically effective ndf fed during the first2–3 months may improve milk yield and fertility .  of cereal grains and corn silage versus highly digestible fibrous concentrates and higher quality grass or legume forages is a topic of current research .  geishauser have both reported a three-fold increased risk of clinical ketosis and displaced abomasums at serum concentrations of bhba at or above 1400 umol/l .  05 l of a solution containing calcium borogluconate and magnesium hypophosphite chloride or borogluconate provide 15 to 4 g of mg .  many theories on why non-structural carbohydrate should be fed to late pregnant dry cows such as developing rumen papillae acclimatizing rumen microbes and avoiding fatty liver .  are caused by rumen acidosis depending on the quantity of acids that accumulate in the rumen .  the possible hepatic pathways of these metabolites and the one that is favoured in times of intense lipolysis and muscle breakdown leads to a production of ketone bodies (acetone acetoacetate ß-hydroxybutyrate [bhb]) and their release into the bloodstream .  application primiparous animals were most likely to benefit from prepartum injection of vitamin e

11 metabolic predictors of post-partum disease and culling risk in dairy cattle
a retrospective study was conducted to determine the relationship between serum non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) β-hydroxybutyrate (bhba) glucose and calcium (ca) with the occurrence of displaced abomasum (da) clinical ketosis and culling in holstein cows .  link between feed intake and subsequent developmentof metritis (huzzey et al 2007 2009) .  is involved in locking up magnesium which is needed in calcium regulation .  martin (1984) found that cows with subclinical ketosis had an increased risk of metritis or clinical ketosis four days later .  system is out of balance hypocalcemia can result1415 occurring simultaneously is the decrease in dry-matter intake (dmi) that occurs in the periparturient period which is insufficient to support the high milk production of lactation and results in a state of negative energy balance (neb) .  may work by controlling overall energy intake by cows and thereby prevent metabolic changes similar to those that develop in fat cows .  of minerals in the diet contributing to dcad can be used to advantage and operation of a partial or full dcad strategy in the control of milk fever is used successfully on many farms for this to work the dcad value of all dry cow diet components is understood and addition of anionic salts to the dry cow diet such as magnesium chloride can help manipulate the diet to induce the metabolic acidosis that is required for optimum calcium regulation around the time of calving .  and energy intake dairy cows like other mammals undergo a normal cycle of body energy storage and mobilization with increased body fat storage during mid-gestation and increased body fat mobilization during early lactation .  was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins and minerals .  a net energy for lactation greater than 165 mcal/kg were associated with increased risk for displacement of abomasum (cameron et al 1999) .  lipid deposited in adipose is in the form of triglycerides that are mobilized as nefa plus the glycerol backbone of the triglyceride .  be the result of a reduced energy supply since milk protein percent is positively associated with net energy balance .  were under clinical observation from calving until 60 days in milk (dim) and during this time there were 22 cases of da 31 cases of clinical ketosis and 39 cows were culled .  concept of ration changes during the transition is that nutrient density is increased gradually from that fed to far-off dry cows to the higher nutrient density required for fresh cows .  in particular face the chal-lenge of negative energy balance (neb) and/or disproportional energy metabolism (fattyliver ketosis subacute acute ruminal acidosis); disturbed mineral utilization (milk feversub-clinical hypocalcemia); and perturbed immune function (retained placenta metritismastitis) .  late pregnancy are in part met by an increasedstate of insulin resistance in adipose tissue and musclecoupled with an increased sensitivity to lipolytic agents(bell 1995) which reduce peripheral glucose uptake andfacilitate nutrient flow away from maternal stores to theplacenta .  dmi tended (p < 011) to be increased by about 15 kg/d for cows fed the highest energy diet compared with cows fed the lowest energy density there was no difference in postpartum dmi milk production energy balance or loss in body condition .  of dietary management and body condition may alter these adaptations affect dry matter intake and increase or decrease susceptibility to periparturient health problems .  milk fever or subclinical hypocalcemia can lead to loss of muscular tonicity resulting in an increased risk of retained placenta and/or displaced abomasums in spite of retained placenta being classified as a problem related to the immune system .  diets to prevent displaced abomasa several aspects are important: maintenance of proper levels of fiber maximization of dry matter intake and limiting the energy density of the diet .  non-esterified fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate and their association with transition dairy cow performance

dairy cows pass through a period of negative energy balance as they transition from late gestation to early lactation .  fat appears to affect some aspects of metabolism of fatty acids in the liver (grum et al 1996; douglas et al 2004 2006) the overall effect on production and feed intake was minimal (douglas et al 2004) .  occurs at 5 days in milk and cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the first week of lactation have a higher risk of negative effects and reduced milk production than cows that develop subclinical ketosis in the second week of lactation .  demand for glucose after calvingoften leads to a fall in circulating insulin in early lactationgenetic selection for milk production has also been associ-ated with a decline in circulating insulin levels (taylor et al2004) .  both fiber (ndf) and non-fiber (nfc) categories .  ca administration is the preferred route of ca administration after the first intravenous dose due to its lesser but consistent effect on blood ca concentration .  estimated that the daily demands for fetal and placental growth in the last 3 wk of gestation are 360 g of metabolizable protein and 3 to 5 mcal of net energy .  high correlations between dmi 1 d before calving and dmi at 21 d after calving (grummer 1995) a major focus on maximizing prepartum dmi has developed in the field .  more recent study we found that cows that received this mild anti-inflammatory treatment approach had reduced incidence of uterine diseases such as metritis and also improved fertility (barragan et al 2021) .  between milk fat and hyperketonemia is presumably because of increased availability of bhba and fatty acids for milk fat synthesis .  common compositions include calcium chloride calcium sulfate and calcium carbonate which have approximate effective calcium absorptions of 95 per cent 70 per cent and 50 per cent in dairy cattle respectively .  therefore focus on removing factors that might limit dry matter intake .  intake can decrease from 2 % of body weight (bw) in the first few weeks of the dry period to 14 % bw in the 7 to 10 d period before calving .  50 multiparous and 25 primigravid holstein cows one of five diets that consisted of a standard nonfibous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum a high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet plus 12 g/d of niacin beginning at 19 d prepartum and a standard nonfibrous carbohydrate diet beginning at 19 d prepartum plus niacin beginning at 14 d postpartum .  we showed that intravenous glucose administration (fig 2) in addition to oral propylene glycol was able to lower bhb concentrations to a greater extent and duration in hyperketonaemic postpartum cows (mann and others 2017) .  the degree of post-partum immune dysregulation and immune recovery response play a key role in the timely reaction to an infectious challenge in order to prevent disease state outcomes such as retained placenta metritis endometritis and mastitis41 as with these disease outcomes increased concentrations of markers of systemic inflammation in the periparturient period are associated with a decrease in milk production and reproductive success17 further highlighting the importance of mounting an adequate immune response during the transition period on productive outcomes .  reviews (1) strategies for testing of energy-related metabolites (2) consequences of poor adaptation to negative energy balance (for individual animals and for herds) (3) treatment approaches for affected cows and (4) economic considerations for testing and treating cows with poor adaptation to negative energy balance .  the interplay between the immune endocrineand metabolic systems (stofkova 2009; pittman 2011)diminished immune competence at calving increases hostsusceptibility to infections (trevisi et al 2011)physiological conditions associated with insufficientenergy supply predispose dairy cows to metabolic andmicrobial diseases such as milk fever endometritis keto-sis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (drackley1999; duffield and herdt 2000) .  above controlling energy intake of close-up cows so that they meet but do not dramatically exceed their energy requirements during this period is a critical target .  data mcnamara et al (2002) reported prolonged negative energy balance in early lactation as a result of feeding 3kg of concentrate for four weeks pre-calving .  energy intake resulted in less mobilization of adipose tissue as parturition approached and lowered plasma nefa concentrations .  as is found in many grass silages is implicated in the dietary cation anion difference (dcad) or in simple terms high potassium induces a state of metabolic alkalosis .  be 2kg of a dry cow nut 2kg of barley or 3kg of maize silage or whole crop-wheat silage .  subclinical metabolic diseases in dairy cows

most periparturient abnormalities have some metabolic element as a component of the cause of clinical disease .  is an important disease of dairy cattle that is associated with increased risk of clinical diseases lost milk production reduced reproductive performance and increased culling risk .  of any of the postpartum production diseases (milk fever ketosis metritis and retained placenta) will reduce the risk for da .  10 to 20% on the top screen 50 to 60% in the middle and < 40% in the bottom pan with the long straw or hay particles not more than 4 cm .  an enormous challenge for the liver that has to synthesize all of this glucose from propionate and amino acids as well as a challenge for other tissues and organs that have to adapt to a reduction of glucose availability .  the energy content of the diet prepartum has been shown to affect dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) and postpartum lactational performance .  is a disease that can be often under-reported due to the use of prophylactic calcium and the perhaps masking of the true levels of the disease experienced by some farms .  of lep-tin is strongly correlated to body condition score (bcs)and falls in late pregnancy (ehrhardt et al 2000; watheset al 2007) .  improve transition cow management hypocalcemia neb and immune dysfunction are related; while all occur to some extent during the transition period our goal as managers is to minimize the severity and duration of these states .  these effectsincubation of ruminant hepatocytes in vitro demonstrateda potential role of linolenic acid in decreasing cellularaccumulation of triglycerides from palmitic acid (masheket al 2002) .  of subclinical ketosis defined as total blood ketones > 9 mg/100 ml (900 µmol/l) was reduced by 50% and blood bhba levels were reduced by 40% for the high monensin group .  ration is changed abruptly at calving the capacity of the rumen flora to metabolize lactate the principal acid responsible for acute rumen acidosis is at a minimum at the initiation of lactation .  can precipitate milk fever through delaying calcium mobilisation from bone around calving and the metabolic consequences culminate in hypocalcaemia .  the important challenges facing the dairy industry is the development implementation and economic assessment of practical integrated blueprints of best practice for prevention of the production diseases and other diseases of the dairy cow .  the glucose needs as well as other nutrient requirements the physiological adaptation of the cow allows for alternative sources of energy and amino acids to be used that stem from adipose and muscle tissue breakdown .  because of its high energy density supplemental fat would seem to be a logical ingredient for minimizing the negative energy balance around and after calving but increasing evidence indicates that cows may not respond as expected during the transition period .  herds with very low milk fever incidence subclinical hypocalcemia [sch) after calving can affect 50% or more of the herd predisposing cows to infectious and metabolic disease and reducing their productive and reproductive potential5'25 36 as these associations continue to be understood the need for strategies to reduce sch incidence is becoming more evident .  of lack of adaptation of the rumen to concentrates and ahigh concentrate intake around parturition against a back-drop of general low feed intake may lead to developmentof sara in the post-partum period33 .  administration of one dose of oral ca approximately eight hours after administration of injectable calcium with a second of oral ca dose given 12 to 24 hours later .  the high energy diet had about 25 times the insulin concentrations as cows fed to meet nrc (2001) energy requirements during the dry period with similar glucose concentrations and serum nefa that were suppressed only by 29% .  information is available for the fiber requirements of dry cows to maintain adequate rumen health and minimize the incidence of displacement of abomasum .  concentrations above 1000 μmol/l increased the likelihood of abomasal displacement (duffield 1997; geishauser et al 1997 leblanc et al 2005) .  for the development of rumen papillae and to acclimatise rumen microbes for dry cows coming off a grass silage-based diet and receiving 4kg or less of concentrate feed in a grazing scenario is unlikely to be significant if bcs is on target .  changes not only contribute to the decline in dmi butalso promote metabolic changes that favor the mobilizationof body fat reserves from adipocytes (drackley et al 2005;ingvartsen 2006)the transient temperature elevation in transition cows(>395◦c) in the days following calving is mainly due tocommon malaise conditions linked to inflammation andthe release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as a tumornecrosis factor alpha (tnf-) interleukins 1 and 6 (il-1and il-6) (trevisi et al 2011) .  dry matter intake diet composition — especially fiber and energy concentrations —is one of the most critical factors .  al (2005) reported cows with 1200 umol/l bhba in the first week postcalving were 8 times more likely to develop an abomasal displacement .  the above data it would appear that a threshold for defining subclinical ketosis with serum bhba should start at about 1400 umol/l .  been defined as the presence of leuko-cytes mainly pmns within the uterine lumen but withoutclinical signs of endometritis (földi et al 2006; sheldonet al 2006b; chapwanya 2008)there is recent evidence that endometritis is associatedwith reduced feed intake severe negative energy bal-ance and disturbed immune function (urton et al 2005;hammon et al 2006; huzzey et al 2007) .  physiological changes during thetransition period: inflammation energy balanceendocrine changes and immunosuppressionthe primary challenge faced by cows is a suddenincrease of nutrient requirements for milk productionat a time when dry matter intake (dmi) and nutri-ent supply lags behind .  and immediate requirement of calcium (ca) for colostrum and milk production paired with a normal decrease in dry matter intake around parturition creates a large ca deficit that takes days to rectify .  be given to the strategic use of proven ancillary aids such as propylene glycol and monensin .  disturbance of milk fever can be measured through low serum calcium concentrations .  with clinical ketosis will show nervous signs such as licking and blindness (11) .  leads to the phenomenon known as subacute rumen acidosis (sara) and contributes to reduced dmi and feed digestibility as well as laminitis in the early postpartum period .  microbial population needed tometabolize the lactic acid arising from the fermentationof abundant carbohydrates lags behind thus disturbingthe balance between production and absorption of fermen-tation end products (nordlund et al 1995; nagaraja andtitgemeyer 2007) .  concentration of fat in the liver of fat cows had increased 514 % by 3 d after calving while the normal cows had an increase in liver fat by only 97 % .  study where cows were treated with a strong anti-inflammatory drug during and after calving treated cows had a higher rate of stillborn calves postpartum fever retained placenta metritis and decreased milk production .  intake regulation of dmi during the periparturient period is complex and largely not understood (ingvartsen and andersen 2000; grummer et al 2004) .  with periparturient disease several investigations have evaluated the relationship between clinical ketosis and other health parameters but few studies have attempted to assess the associations between subclinical ketosis and periparturient disease .  goals of these practices must be maximizing dry matter intake and modulating stress and inflammation .  studies9'10'20 24 suggest that overfeeding cows beginning during this period leads to lower post-partum dry matter intakes increased mobilization of body tissue increased circulating concentrations of nefa and bhb and increased risk for metabolic disorders and poorer productive and reproductive performance .  lactational incidences of das < 3% clinical milk fever < 2% and retained fetal membranes of < 8% .  way to assess this to guarantee feed availability is to use the feed bunk space method .  periparturient nutrition and management strategies have decreased the occurrence of clinical hypocalcemia over the past few decades; however subclinical hypocalcemia remains an important aspect of transition cow health .  and concentrate allowances should also be compared to the cows energy requirement using the ufl system .  high in nonfibrous carbohydrates improve energy status of transition cows provision of adequate amounts of physically effective ndf is important to maintain rumen fill thereby helping in the prevention of displacement of abomasum .  this phenomenon includes the classic study by garnsworthy and topps (1982) and our own recent data (douglas et al 2006) showing that cows that are forced away from their desired body condition (either fatter or thinner) before calving eventually converge to a similar body condition score by 4 to 8 wk after calving .  to partition available energy for milk production early in lactation (bauman and currie 1980) has made the role of energy balance a key factor in the study of milk production reproductive performance and disease occurrence .  concentrations of cholesterol and fas were associated with an increased odds of rp .  same time animals often show a substantial decrease in dry matter intake .  fatty liver syndromeketosis is the imbalanced use of body fat by acow common in early lactation and is characterized byhypoglycemia and hyperketonemia (kehrli et al 2006)insufficient blood glucose levels induce a decline in plasmainsulin and mobilization of triacylglycerol deposits asnefa (block and sanchez 2000) .  a tmr with sfc during the last 4 wk of gestation consumed more energy than cows fed a tmr with cc .  commonly referred to as milk fever was first described in 1793 which coincided with the provision of additional nutrition to cows to increase milk production .  associations between subclinical ketosis health and production impairment are supported by the impact of monensin on reduction of subclinical ketosis and the observed improvement in health and production .  when serum calcium concentration falls faster than homeostatic mechanisms can adapt to the demands of lactation .  requirement for concentrate in the dry cow diet of most irish cows (ca 5000l of milk 400kg f and p) should be driven primarily by concerns about bcs and silage quality .  in insulin combined with a decrease in sensitivity of adipose tissue to insulin and the increase in somatotropin results in a decrease in the synthesis of triglycerides in adipose and favors their mobilization (bell 1995; lanna and bauman 1999) .  of fibrous feeds typically is thought to result in more acetate than propionate production in the rumen greater fermentability still increases total energy supply and supply of propionate for glucose production .  ofthe lda cases are accompanied by neb (heuer 2000)bhba and aspartate aminotransferase (asat) activity inthe blood both parameters associated with neb of post-partum cows may be used to predict the development oflda (geishauser et al 2000) .  current literature and the undesired potential for immunosuppressive effects during a period of high risk for infectious diseases we do not recommend the use of glucocorticoids as a general approach to ketosis treatment .  recently reported commercial field trial (sanchez et al 2003) cows fed a supplement of calcium soaps of soybean oil (rich in linoleic acid and also supplying linolenic acid) pre- and postpartum had a tendency (p < 010) for fewer incidents of milk fever displaced abomasum mastitis and abortion than cows receiving similar amounts of tallow or calcium soaps of palm oil .  the incidence of retained placenta tended to be lowered by 25% in monensin treated cows (p=009) .  concentrations tended to be higher and nonesterified fatty acids and ß-hydroxybutyrate concentrations were lower for cows fed the high nonfibrous carbohydrate diet .  of our studies we found that cows that experienced a difficult calving had an elevated inflammatory response in the days after calving and subsequently a higher risk of developing diseases compared to cows that experienced a normal calving .  in the case of mastitis herd protocol may be to treat only gram-positive mastitis and if only treatments are recorded all gram-negative cases might not be recorded and thus the true incidence of clinical mastitis would be underestimated .  is arguably the classic veterinary disease of dairy cattle with stories of recumbent cows soon after calving recounted for centuries .  lower energy diets fed during the close-up period as described above typically contain limited amounts of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate (16 to 18% starch] microbial protein synthesis is limited and diets generally contain 22 to 44 lb (1 to 2 kg] of ruminally undegradable protein sources in order to meet the metabolizable protein recommendation outlined above .  the above discussion it appears prudent to begin to increase nfc in the prepartum transition period to adapt the rumen wall to vfa to feed as frequently as possible postpartum or to offer tmr to reduce acid accumulation at any time during the day to verify that the proper amounts of effective fiber are being fed (and consumed) and that sufficient dietary buffers are offered in the postpartum diet .  in this study was also reported to reduce both the onset and severity of subclinical ketosis when cows where restricted to 90% of ad libitum feed intake commencing at 2 wk postcalving .  balance is a normal occurrence in dairy cattle during the transition from late gestation to early lactation .  either ration ad libitum gained about 02 body condition score units during the dry period whereas restricted cows lost about 05 body condition units from dry-off to calving .  of prepartum serum cholesterol and fatty acids concentrations as predictors of postpartum retention of the placenta in dairy cows

objective—to identify serum biochemical and hematologic variables as measured in the week before parturition that predict postpartum retention of the placenta (rp) in dairy cows .  of bhba were associated with da clinical ketosis and culling .  a tmr with sfc during the postpartum period consumed more energy and produced more milk with lower fat and mun contents than cows fed cc .  lose more muscle fiber area after parturition than thin cows suggesting greater mobilization of body protein as well as fat (reid et al 1986) .  canadian study conducted in 45 dairy herds confirmed that monensin crc reduces the incidence of displaced abomasum (duffield et al 2002) .  dry period) cows fed average quality grass silage (68 dmd) should have an increase in bcs of approximately 05 units before calving .  with the forage base consisting of either straw or mature low-potassium hay blended with corn silage and a grain mix can be easily sorted by cows if the straw or hay is not chopped ideally prior to mixing into the tmr .  can exceed the gluconeogenic capacity of the liver; for example in the immediate postpartum period when the need for glucose supply for lactose production rises quickly .  and managing energy balance in the transition dairy cow

dairy cattle are at an increased risk for many diseases and disorders during early lactation (10) .  example thin vs obese dry cows will have different dynamics in fat metabolism dmi patterns and nutrient needs both pre- and postpartum .  supplements designed to increase escape of polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa) to the intestine might be beneficial .  the glucose that the cow requires is synthesized by gluconeogenesis in the liver from propionic acid amino acids and the glycerol liberated from adipose .  of clinical ketosis were 63 times greater in cows with serum nefa ⩾ 10 mmol/l in the first week after calving .  hope-cawdery (1980) first described the beneficial effects of monensin for reducing the incidence of ketosis in a herd with a clinical ketosis problem .  of the dairy cow are caused by a level of production inconsistent with nutrient intake provision of an inadequate diet an unsuitable environment an inappropriate breeding policy or various combinations of these factors .  hyperketonemia as mentioned above have an effect on proper immune function thus the risk of infectious diseases is higher in cows with excessive energy or calcium deficiencies .  cow level the following metabolite concentrations are associated with negative downstream outcomes: pre-partum bhb > 06 to 08 mmol/l; pre-partum nefa > 03 to 05 meq/l; post-partum nefa > 07 to 1 m eq/l; and post-partum bhb > 10 to 14 mmol/l27 at the herd level negative downstream outcomes can be seen when more than 15 to 25% of the individual cows sampled (given the appropriate sample size) are above the metabolite concentrations shown above6-32 herd-level sensitivity is adversely affected by low cow-level test sensitivity especially at lower prevalences and smaller sample sizes33 an initial sample for prevalence estimation should be performed following the sample size guidelines described elsewhere33 eg test at least 20 at-risk animals who are subjectively healthy and 3 to 14 dim .  like da retained fetal membranes and clinical milk fever do not suf¬ fer from having lots of momentum and lag either .  trace elements and vitamins are also important and the dry cow diet should include a specific dry cow mineral .  ospina et al in which larger freestall dairy farms that almost exclusively commingled cows and heifers during the immediate prepartum period suggested that a staggering 70% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the prepartum period which clearly indicated that dmi was compromised in these animals32 furthermore nearly 50% of herds had more than 25% of their primiparous animals with elevated nefa during the post-partum period .  ketosis and subclinical hypocalcemia appear to increase the risk of culling .  also tends to improve total dmi diet digestibility and ruminal fermentation over forages alone (grummer 1995) at least over the short-term in the close-up diet .  target energy intake of cows during the close-up period at 110 to 130% of energy requirements .  dexamethasone in addition to propylene glycol in hyperketonemic cows was also shown to reduce pregnancy at first artificial insemination and increase the duration of ketosis at higher bhb concentrations in a study involving four herds (tatone and others 2016a) .  trials have shown that oral propylene glycol treatment (fig 1) has the strongest scientific evidence of demonstrating efficacy in the prevention and treatment of hyperketonaemia .  plasma progesterone which is high in gestation rapidly falls at calving and there is a transitory elevation in estrogens and glucocorticoids in the periparturient period .  transition cow is likely to be in a state of lipolysis predominantly because of her energy balance status and her hormonal profile (low insulin and high cortisol) that does not favor body fat deposition .  because the energy demands for early lactation milk production cannot be completely met by feed intake .  analysis systems offer an additional technological improvement for detection of early lactation subclinical neb disorders and mastitis .  for methionine in bovine ketosis has been speculatedfor more than 30 years (mccarthy et al 1968; watermanand schultz 1972) .  the occurrence of diseases inperiparturient cows center on the three principal axes ofdisproportional energy metabolism disturbed mineral uti-lization and perturbed immune function there is a needfor further research to identify ways of regulating immuneresponses for preventing transition diseasesbecause the disorders mentioned above are interrelatedand can occur as a complex in one animal or in a herd herdhealth management strategies designed to prevent thesediseases are urgently needed .  (da) is characterized by the displacement of the abomasum from its normal position on the right ventral aspect of the abdomen to the right or left da (lda) side in cattle with lda being more frequently diagnosed than right da .  carbohydrates (sugars and starch provided by grains) must be present to optimize rumen fermentation and provide adequate energy in the form of propionic acid for glucose synthesis and suppression of ketogenesis .  and reduced dry matter intake are aggravated .  logical that use of separate pre-calving and post-calving diets especially when fed as total mixed rations (tmr) should help maintain dmi around calving and promote more rapid increases in dmi after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders .  discussion above it is obvious that preventing the decline in dmi prepartum increasing dmi rapidly postpartum and making certain that energy density is as high as possible in both transition phases are the most important control points for these cows .  logical that use of separate close-up and fresh cow diets especially when fed as a total mixed ration (tmr) should help cows come onto feed faster and more smoothly after calving with a lower incidence of postpartum health disorders .  of free fatty acids results in the production of the major ketone bodies acetone acetoacetate and beta-hydroxy butyrate (bhb) (11) .  steam-flaked corn had lower blood urea n concentrations during the prepartum period and lower plasma nonesterified fatty acid concentrations during the prepartum and postpartum periods .  of cow health including infectious and metabolic diseases physical form and composition of diets during the transition period and cow comfort are factors linked to the pathogenesis of da .  suggested thatoptimizing dmi requires different diets at different stagesof the lactation because dmi is controlled by oxidationof fuels (fatty acids propionate lactate and amino acids)in the liver in early lactation and by gut fill as lactationapproaches peak (allen et al 2009) .  indicated that early post-partum serum bhba nefa and ca concentrations have potential as indicators of disease and culling risk in dairy cows .  experiments liver slices from overfed cows had a lower capacity for oxidation of fatty acids and greater esterification capacity compared with cows fed the lower energy diet (litherland et al 2003) .  have been proven to have a significantly increased risk of lameness uterine health issues and retained foetal membranes .  unclear whether increased levels of circulating ketones cause increased milk fat or if cows that are prone to higher milk fat yields are more susceptible to subclinical ketosis .  production response was noted in thin cows presumably because they had the lowest bhba concentrations and were at decreased risk of subclinical ketosis .  were no significant differences between treatment groups in the incidence of retained placenta clinical mastitis metritis endometritis ketosis displaced abomasum or lameness .  player in milk fever prevention is potassium .  body of knowledge already exists which should allow for the optimal management and prevention of bovine production diseases .  clean water is essential and an adequate area where cows can drink that is sufficient for the size of the dry cow area fresh drinking water is essential to maximise feed intake .  key area already addressed in the control of milk fever is the control of body condition score maintaining bcs in the desired range at calving is a fundamental point in preventing milk fever .  level risk factors most likely involve combinations of management feed quality and nutritional programs cow comfort environment and other variables that influence dry matter intake .  negative energy balance in transition cows for better dairy herd results

introduction 

most transition dairy cows visit a state of negative energy balance (neb) due to increased energy demands after parturition coupled with lagging dry matter intake (hayirli et al 2002) .  milk fat yield was significantly higher in both subclinically ketotic and clinically ketotic cows compared to normal cows (kauppinen 1984) .  large and small continue to be plagued by a high incidence of metabolic disorders and infectious diseases around calving .  lysine are frequently con-sidered to be the most limiting amino acids for synthesis ofmilk and milk protein (national research council 2001)these two amino acids also have potential roles in mito-chondrial b-oxidation of fatty acids (carnitine biosynthesis)in liver and export of triglycerides as vldl (apolipopro-tein b100 biosynthesis) (bauchart et al 1998) .  working hypothesis under investigation in our laboratory is that extended periods of feeding diets high in starch and/or total energy to dairy cows during late gestation induce changes analogous to insulin resistance in other species even in the absence of visible overconditioning .  revealed that older cows were more at risk for retained placenta milk fever and mastitis .  dahl reviewed the literature related to heat stress and the implementation of heat abatement strategies during the transition period and the effects on the dam and the calf44 their summary suggests remarkably consistent and beneficial results of heat abatement both on the subsequent performance of the dam and also the calf through its developmental cycle .  areas that form the basis for this approach are body condition score management negative energy balance hypocalcaemia rumen health and trace element status .  that elevated glucose concentrations such as might occur in overfed cows with insulin resistance had altered abomasal function that would be consistent with greater likelihood for abomasal displacement .  is much variation in the magnitude of the neb after calving depending upon body condition score at calving (garnsworthy 1989) the severity of the depression in dmi (bertics et al 1992) the quality of the ration and season .  therapy is imperative to prevent progression to death it is important to note that additional ca is required to counter the ca deficit until the cow returns to normal feed intake .  high-bulk tmr that will limit total energy intake but provide adequate amounts of protein and other nutrients cows can be allowed to consume feed ad libitum and meet their requirements while preventing overconsumption of energy .  been well-documented previously and supported by recent research30'32 energy intake below requirements as reflected by elevated nefa concentrations during the close-up period is associated with increased incidence of post-partum metabolic disorders lower milk production and poorer reproductive performance .  ketosis may be a cause of displacement and abomasal displacement may lead to ketosis .  of cows were too small to make reliable inferences about health data the number of health problems actually was numerically greater for the high density diet (11) than for the lowest density diet (5) .  arises if either the pdin or the pdie value of grass silage is less than 60g/kg of dm .  is another option for control of milk fever if implemented correctly .  the odds ratio decreased from 07 at 1100 umol/l bhba to 031 at 1900 umol/l bhba implying in a sense a dose effect of ketone concentration .  of certain feed additives such as propylene glycol and ionophores may also aid in the prevention of ketosis .  reducing the prevalence of low serum calcium include reducing potassium in feedstuffs precalving and adding chlorinated supplements to the close-up diet .  produce an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase that will break down the lipoproteins (from the intestine or exported from the liver) to nefa for utilization .  in post-partum systemic inflammatory response and the effects on health and productivity in transition dairy cows has yet to clarify to what extent and persistency inflammation should be considered a normal adaptive response4 from a management perspective overcrowding comingling of fresh heifers and mature cows competition at the feedbunk excessive pathogen pressure heat stress and stressful handling situations all affect the ability of the transition cow's immune system to adequately react to infectious challenges .  problems that affect early postpartum cows such as retained fetal membranes milk fever ketosis and displaced abomasum are know to extend the period of negative energy balance and delay resumption of ovarian cycles .  nfc increases abruptly at calving with high levels of fermentable carbohydrates the amount of vfa produced far exceeds the capacity of the rumen to absorb them leading to elevated concentrations of vfa in the rumen .  adequate fiber of sufficient particle size is needed to maintain good rumen function prevent displaced abomasum and achieve high dmi .  a huge number of factors that determine energy allowance for example feed space weather grazing conditions and silage qualities are all important .  energy balance may also increase the risk of retained placenta metritis and mastitis through impaired immune function .  last 2 decades much intensive research has been completed in addressing transition cows relative to nutrient requirements physiologic adaptations and metabolic associations with periparturient disease; yet dairy farms continue to be plagued by high prevalence of costly fresh cow disorders adversely affecting productivity and reproductive performance (table 1) .  our group and miner institute suggests that there are interactions of both prepartum and post-partum starch levels and also starch and fiber levels in fresh diets .  in concert with elevated cortisol stimulates the liver to produce more glucose .  first week after calving cows with serum bhba ⩾ 1000 μmol/l had 136 times greater odds of developing da than cows with lower values .  with aggressive fresh cow programs incidence of displacement of abomasum is below 2% of the total cows calving per year and these herds can feed prepartum diets with less than 35% ndf therefore higher energy diets .  of the prepartum dieta concept that has been perpetuated through the sci-entific literature (rabelo et al 2003) is that diets higherin non- fiber carbohydrates (nfc) content than traditionaldry cow diets must be fed prior to calving to promotedevelopment of ruminal papillae for adequate absorptionof volatile fatty acids produced during ruminal fermenta-tion .  feeding standards organisations (nrc 2001) recommend higher protein allowances than the pdi allowances research work carried out in ireland found no benefit to supplementing high levels of protein to dry cows fed grass silage based diets .  non-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and/or βhydroxybutyrate (bhb) are common measures of neb and/or ketosis in transition animals (duffield et al 2009) .  creates a negative energy balance .  perfect sense in that the liver is producing lipoproteins for other tissues and should not be able to extract them from the blood when it has an alternative i e nefa as an energy source .  period cows should have access to fresh feed at least 23 hours a day and only have no feed available while cleaning the feed bunk in between feed deliveries .  the feed bunk space in inches and dividing that by number of cows in the pen the space at the feed bunk that each cow has access to can be estimated .  may impair normal functions of the liver and increase ketogenesis which in turn may predispose cows to other metabolic abnormalities .  form of acidosis (sara) is present in a large numberof dairy cows with impaired immune function (krause andoetzel 2006) .  densities are adjusted based upon actual dmi of cows on farms to achieve the overall targets for energy intake during the close-up period described above .  from burke et al (2010) for new zealand dairy cows indicates that feeding nonfibrous carbohydrate in the late pregnant dairy cow diet had no effect on reproduction in grazing dairy cows .  of 56 g per day of rumen protected choline during the transition period did not affect bhba nefa liver glycogen or liver triglyceride .  an equally important energy source for the ovary and the reduced glucose availability in the beginning of lactation can negatively impact the re-establishment of ovarian activity after calving (rabiee et al 1999) .  the milk fat yield of ketotic cows is increased due to the availability of beta-hydroxybutyric acid (bhb) and fatty acids .  metabolic problems gravitate around 3 principal axes: disorders related to energy metabolism (fatty liver ketosis subacute and acute ruminal acidosis); disorders related to mineral metabolism (milk fever sub-clinical hypocalcemia udder edema); and problems related to the immune system (retained placenta metritis mastitis) .  consistent associations have been between subclinical ketosis clinical ketosis and displaced abomasum .  of closeup cows may decline by 10 to 30% during the last 7 to 14 days before calving increased nutrient density may allow maintenance of the same intake amounts (pounds or grams per cow per day) of key nutrients such as protein despite lower total feed intake .  hyperketonemia (defined as bhb concentration >12 mmol/l) prevalence < 15 to 20% and fresh-cow mastitis prevalence (defined as first test day linear score > 4] to be < 10% for multiparous cows and < 7% for first-parity heifers .  intake (dmi) decreases by over 30% in the last 3 weeks of gestation (hayirli et al 2002) and this limits the availability of energy sources during a time of increased demand; within 4 days post-partum due to milk production the demands for glucose amino acids and fatty acids are 2–5 times higher than pre-partum requirements (bell 1995) .  serum calcium concentrations less than or equal to 18 mmol/l and not diagnosed with milk fever were approximately 30 times and cows with serum bhba concentrations above 1400 umol/l were 14 times more likely to be culled in the first 60 days of lactation after controlling for the risk of clinical disease on culling and the random effect of herd (duffield et al 2005)  thresholds for defining subclinical disease most thresholds in the literature for defining subclinical disease are arbitrary .  diets contain between 30 to 40% ndf and manipulation of the fiber content of the ration should be made to accommodate the needs of the specific herd .  fat appears to be ineffective at suppressing body fat mobilization during the negative energy balance of early lactation (chilliard 1993) .  responses in production do not appear to relatedirectly to effects of methionine and lysine on hepaticlipid or glucose metabolism (bertics and grummer 1999;piepenbrink et al 2004; socha et al 1994) .  the prepartum and postpartum transition period cows require more energy than they are able to consume resulting in the neb and the concomitant loss of body weight (condition) to supply the necessary energy even in healthy cows (bell 1995) .  large study including cows from 20 herds the authors showed an increased risk for ketosis in cows that were ketotic at the time of treatment as well as in healthy postpartum cows when cows were treated with a single injection of isoflupredone acetate between one and three days postpartum (seifi and others 2007) .  concept is to strive to meet the requirements of cows for energy and all other nutrients but to not allow cows to exceed their requirements for energy by consuming large amounts for the duration of the dry period .  ideal window for herd monitoring for neb is in the days 15-50 in milk post calving the thresholds are different and nefa >07mmol/l and bhb >14mmol/l are indicative of neb .  in peak occurrence for subclinical ketosis may reflect differences in etiology with early lactation occurrence reflecting suboptimal dry cow management and expression of fatty liver while later occurrences may indicate deficiencies in lactating cow management (cook et al 2001) .  at a typical consumption level by dry cows (18 to 20% of body weight; butler et al 2011) some grass silages will provide an insufficient amount of energy for pregnant dry cows and some will provide too much energy .  mg deficit of a cow exhibiting hypomagnesaemic tetany it is usually estimated that the immediate intravenous administration of 15 to 225 g of mg is required to normalise blood mg concentration (goff 2004) .  that can increase dry matter intake and modulate stress are keeping the number of pen movements at the minimum possible (to decrease the stress associated with the re-establishment of pen social hierarchy) and avoiding commingling first-lactation cows with older cows .  is a physiologically normal process excessive neb reflects poor adaptation and results in adverse health and production effects after calving .  a large proportion of cows post-partum15-36 in a study including 55 dairy herds across the united states herds where > 15% of cows had a plasma calcium concentration 35% prevalence of post-partum hypocalcemia had odds of developing a displaced abomasum 2 times higher than herds with a lower prevalence and herds with a >25% prevalence of hypocalcemia had 30% lower odds of becoming pregnant to first service6 with such a high per¬ centage of evaluated farms above these thresholds these data indicate a large degree of downstream costs associated with hypocalcemia at a herd level .  a 5% relative increase in the odds of rp for each 01 mmol/l increase in cholesterol or fas concentration in the week before parturition .  balance fat mobilization and subsequent elevations in ketone body concentrations play a contributing role in the expression of fatty liver syndrome clinical ketosis and abomasal displacement .  was a 50:50 mixture (dm basis) of corn silage and alfalfa silage supplemented with vitamins and minerals .  high nonfirbrous carbohydrate diet prepartum increased dry matter and energy intake which improved energy balance of cows throughout the transition period .  calving cows experience large changes in nutrient demands and many metabolic adaptations occur to maintain homeorhesis1 of foremost interest are the adaptive mechanisms to maintain calcium and energy homeostasis .  of management to optimize post-partum health production and reproduction dairy herds vary widely in the degree to which they achieve success in maintaining excellent health both in terms of clinical and subclinical health disorders high milk yield during early lactation and return to estrous cycling with high fertility in the post-partum period .  a prepartum “vfa load” strategy by feeding an allotment of barley grain altered vfa concentrations and ph in the rumen but did not affect rumen epithelium (andersen et al 1999) and did not positively affect dmi or milk production postpartum (ingvartsen et al 2001) .  summary of the two canadian projects showed that monensin crc reduced the incidence of displaced abomasum and clinical ketosis by 40% each .  rations (high in corn silage and grains) during the entire dry period is detrimental to cow performance and metabolic responses .  will discuss the di¬ agnostic tools available to bovine practitioners for individual animal calcium concentration determination and herd-level monitoring as well as current developments in the epidemiology of hypocalcemia and its prevention .  ofnefa generates the metabolite acetyl coenzyme a thatcan be used to generate energy via the krebs cycle .  closeup period (3 wk before parturition) cows that previously had overconsumed energy during the far-off dry period had greater nefa concentrations (323 vs 230 µmol/l) than cows previously fed to meet energy requirements .  inflammation exacer-bates negative energy status (trevisi et al 2007 2010)while carbohydrate insufficiency increases production ofnon-esterified fatty acids (nefa) and ketone bodies in theliver (duffield and herdt 2000; drackley et al 2001) .  cannot decrease the nutrient demands that cows have at this time but we can decrease the drop in dry matter intake through proper management .  decrease in nefa bhba and glucose was noted in the precalving period .  clinical signs will not disappear until the csf mg concentration increases usually about 1 hour after the iv administration of mg because the blood-brain barrier decreases the diffusion of mg during this time it is important not to stimulate the animals to rise in order to avoid the initiation of a tetany episode .  energy density of the prepartum diet with grains equivocally affects the risk of da .  a multifactorial disorder usually diagnosed in early lactation dairy cows .  type of concentrate fed in early lactation can have an impact on metabolic status (whelan et al 2012) reported that grazing cows fed 6kg of 14% protein compound based on maize had a significantly lower blood urea and betahydroxybutyrate compared to grazing cows fed an 18% protein compound based on barley without any significant effect on the production of milk protein and fat .  weeks of the onset of lactation milkyield milk proteins fat and lactose increase rapidly andexceed feed intake (bertoni et al 2009) .  in dietary gluco-genic nutrients (27% starch) in grass and corn silage-baseddiets fed through 9 wk postpartum improved energy sta-tus assessed by calculated energy balance plasma nefaand bhba concentrations and liver triglyceride contentbut did not affect dmi or milk yield (van knegsel et al2007) .  effects of high fermentable energy diets fed prepartum are expected to minimize the incidence of subclinical ketosis and hepatic lipidosis which might have positive effects on postpartum fertility .  postpar-tum period is considered to be the major risk periodbecause hypocalcemia metritis negative energy balanceand nutritional factors play a central role in the patho-genesis of lda (shaver 1997) .  decrease in dmi before calving would result in the need to increase contents of crude protein and nel by about 2 percentage units and 084 mj/kg of dm respectively in the pre-calving diet .  starchcontent and starch fermentability may increase dmi inearly lactation since there is less rapid production andabsorption of propionate (allen et al 2009) .  consistent and properly processed ration daily is a key element to be considered when monitoring feed management in displaced abomasum prevention .  pre-vent ketosis and fatty liver syndrome it is necessary to avoidexcessive weight loss in the peripartal period .  pathological changes associated with negative energy balance are important factors related to development of ketosis displaced abomasum and retained placenta (duffield et al 2002) and may impact the immune system to increase occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and metritis (dohoo and martin 1984; kremer et al 1993) .  studies oral administration of a bolus of 300 ml of propylene glycol for three to five days has been shown to shorten time to recovery from ketosis as well as aid the prevention of negative health outcomes commonly associated with this metabolic disorder such as displacement of the abomasum and milk loss (mcart and others 2011 mcart and others 2012a tatone and others 2016a gordon and others 2017) .  was designed in an effort to adapt the rumen microbial population and rumen papillae to higher nutrient diets fed after calving decrease body fat mobilization and fat deposition in liver and control blood calcium concentrations .  and bhba concentrations during week 1 were associated with the subsequent occurrence of clinical ketosis .  ofthe fetus reach maximal levels three weeks prepartumyet dry matter intake (dmi) decreases by 10–30% (bell1995) .  used for subclinical hypocalcemia and ketosis are based on reference values where the limit is set at above or below a 95% confidence interval .  effects on prepartum or postpartum dry matter intake body weight and body condition score were observed .  matter intake can vary widely from 5-15kg dm depending on the time of year .  knowledge no studies of sufficiently large sample size are currently available that contrast and compare the magnitude of effect of oral propylene glycol and intravenous glucose administration alone or in combination on cow health and production outcomes .  cows were assigned to a postpartum total mixed ration that contained either cracked corn or steam-flaked corn .  the threshold chosen for hyperketonemia the incidence of subclinical ketosis should be considerably higher than that of clinical ketosis .  of water or another wet ingredient to decrease the ration dry matter into the 46 to 48% range is also required for optimal effectiveness of these rations .  neb in the transition period can aid in the development of metabolic diseases prolong the interval between calving and first ovulation and decrease fertility .  of fatty acids (fas) β-hydroxybutyrate cholesterol glucose urea and calcium and blood leukocyte neutrophil lymphocyte monocyte and eosinophil counts were determined .  group has been interested in the potential use of supplemental fat during the dry period to restore body condition to thin cows and as a possible metabolism modifier .  for ketosis in dairy cattle include direct intravenous administration of glucose oral treatment with gluconeogenic precursors such as propylene glycol and ancillary treatments such as administration of b-vitamins choline and glucocorticoids .  of propylene glycol of 1l per day as an oral drench for 9 days prior to calving decreased bhba and nefa and increased glucose concentrations (studer et al 1993) .  feed additives in addition to good nutrition certain feed additives have been found beneficial in reducing subclinical ketosis when administered prophylactically .  cows postpartum will react differently to supplemental nutrients in the pre- and postpartum periods from lower producing cows as their needs metabolic processes and dmi differ from one another .  cows with propylene glycol is cost effective in almost all scenarios until preventive management strategies can be put in place .  macromineral nutrition energy nutrition and protein and amino acid nutrition .  is a multifactorial disorder diagnosed almost exclusively in adult dairy cows .  calcium concentrations at a level required for life (eg thermoregulation muscle contraction] while transferring a large quantity to colostrum cows increase secretion of parathyroid hormone which increases release of calcium from bone decreases calcium excretion by the kidney and indirectly increases intestinal absorption of calcium .  is reduced through approaches to achieve a negative dietary cation anion difference metabolic problems may get worse rather than better .  concentrations of bhba at or above1400 µmol/l in the first two weeks post calving were three times more likely to subsequently develop either clinical ketosis or abomasal displacement (duffield 1997) .  more than a 15–20% prevalence of excessively elevated concentrations of nefas and β-hydroxybutyrate in early lactation have higher rates of negative subsequent events poorer reproduction and lower milk yield than herds with a lower prevalence of negative energy balance .  al (1998b) reported that monensin crc administration at 3 wk prior to calving reduced the incidence prevalence and duration of subclinical ketosis in a 1010-cow multi herd field study .  